<h4>I</h4>

<h5>THE PEARL AT THE FOOT OF THE PRECIPICE</h5>


<p>A few moments after his short colloquy with Sieur Landoys,
Gilliatt was at St. Sampson.</p>

<p>He was troubled, even anxious. What could it be that had
happened.</p>

<p>There was a murmur in St. Sampson like that of a startled
hive. Everybody was at his door. The women were talking
loud. There were people who seemed relating some occurrence
and who were gesticulating. A group had gathered around
them. The words could be heard, "What a misfortune!"
Some faces wore a smile.</p>

<p>Gilliatt interrogated no one. It was not in his nature to ask
questions. He was, moreover, too much moved to speak to
strangers. He had no confidence in rumours. He preferred to
go direct to the Bravées.</p>

<p>His anxiety was so great that he was not even deterred from
entering the house.</p>

<p>The door of the great lower room opening upon the Quay,
moreover, stood quite open. There was a swarm of men and
women on the threshold. Everybody was going in, and Gilliatt
went with the rest.</p>

<p>Entering he found Sieur Landoys standing near the doorposts.</p>

<p>"You have heard, no doubt, of this event?"</p>

<p>"No."</p>

<p>"I did not like to call it out to you on the road. It makes
me like a bird of evil omen."</p>

<p>"What has happened?"</p>

<p>"The Durande is lost."</p>

<p>There was a crowd in the great room.</p>

<p>The various groups spoke low, like people in a sick chamber.</p>

<p>The assemblage, which consisted of neighbours, the first
comers, curious to learn the news, huddled together near the
door with a sort of timidity, leaving clear the bottom of the
room, where appeared Déruchette sitting and in tears. Mess
Lethierry stood beside her.</p>

<p>His back was against the wall at the end of the room. His
sailor's cap came down over his eyebrows. A lock of grey hair
hung upon his cheek. He said nothing. His arms were
motionless; he seemed scarcely to breathe. He had the look
of something lifeless placed against the wall.</p>

<p>It was easy to see in his aspect a man whose life had been
crushed within him. The Durande being gone, Lethierry had
no longer any object in his existence. He had had a being on
the sea; that being had suddenly foundered. What could he
do now? Rise every morning: go to sleep every night. Never
more to await the coming of the Durande; to see her get under
way, or steer again into the port. What was a remainder of
existence without object? To drink, to eat, and then?—He
had crowned the labours of his life by a masterpiece: won by
his devotion a new step in civilisation. The step was lost; the
masterpiece destroyed. To live a few vacant years longer!
where would be the good? Henceforth nothing was left for
him to do. At his age men do not begin life anew. Besides,
he was ruined. Poor old man!</p>

<p>Déruchette, sitting near him on a chair and weeping, held
one of Mess Lethierry's hands in hers. Her hands were joined:
his hand was clenched fast. It was the sign of the shade of
difference in their two sorrows. In joined hands there is still
some token of hope, in the clenched fist none.</p>

<p>Mess Lethierry gave up his arm to her, and let her do with it
what she pleased. He was passive. Struck down by a thunderbolt,
he had scarcely a spark of life left within him.</p>

<p>There is a degree of overwhelmment which abstracts the mind
entirely from its fellowship with man. The forms which come
and go within your room become confused and indistinct. They
pass by, even touch you, but never really come near you. You
are far away; inaccessible to them, as they to you. The intensities
of joy and despair differ in this. In despair, we take
cognisance of the world only as something dim and afar off:
we are insensible to the things before our eyes; we lose the
feeling of our own existence. It is in vain, at such times, that
we are flesh and blood; our consciousness of life is none the
more real: we are become, even to ourselves, nothing but a
dream.</p>

<p>Mess Lethierry's gaze indicated that he had reached this state
of absorption.</p>

<p>The various groups were whispering together. They exchanged
information as far as they had gathered it. This was
the substance of their news.</p>

<p>The Durande had been wrecked the day before in the fog on
the Douvres, about an hour before sunset. With the exception
of the captain, who refused to leave his vessel, the crew and
passengers had all escaped in the long-boat. A squall from
the south-west springing up as the fog had cleared, had almost
wrecked them a second time, and had carried them out to sea
beyond Guernsey. In the night they had had the good fortune
to meet with the <i>Cashmere</i>, which had taken them aboard and
landed them at St. Peter's Port. The disaster was entirely the
fault of the steersman Tangrouille, who was in prison. Clubin
had behaved nobly.</p>

<p>The pilots, who had mustered in great force, pronounced the
words "The Douvres" with a peculiar emphasis. "A dreary
half-way house that," said one.</p>

<p>A compass and a bundle of registers and memorandum-books
lay on the table; they were doubtless the compass of the
Durande and the ship's papers, handed by Clubin to Imbrancam
and Tangrouille at the moment of the departure of the long-boat.
They were the evidences of the magnificent self-abnegation
of that man who had busied himself with saving these
documents even in the presence of death itself—a little incident
full of moral grandeur; an instance of sublime self-forgetfulness
never to be forgotten.</p>

<p>They were unanimous in their admiration of Clubin; unanimous
also in believing him to be saved after all. The <i>Shealtiel</i>
cutter had arrived some hours after the <i>Cashmere</i>. It was this
vessel which had brought the last items of intelligence. She
had passed four-and-twenty hours in the same waters as the
Durande. She had lain-to in the fog, and tacked about during
the squall. The captain of the <i>Shealtiel</i> was present among
the company.</p>

<p>This captain had just finished his narrative to Lethierry as
Gilliatt entered. The narrative was a true one. Towards the
morning, the storm having abated, and the wind becoming
manageable, the captain of the <i>Shealtiel</i> had heard the lowing
of oxen in the open sea. This rural sound in the midst of the
waves had naturally startled him. He steered in that direction,
and perceived the Durande among the Douvres. The sea
had sufficiently subsided for him to approach. He hailed the
wreck; the bellowing of the cattle was the sole reply. The
captain of the <i>Shealtiel</i> was confident that there was no one
aboard the Durande. The wreck still held together well, and
notwithstanding the violence of the squall, Clubin could have
passed the night there. He was not the man to leave go his
hold very easily. He was not there, however; and therefore
he must have been rescued. It was certain that several sloops
and luggers, from Granville and St. Malo, must, after laying-to
in the fog on the previous evening, have passed pretty near the
rocks. It was evident that one of these had taken Clubin
aboard. It was to be remembered that the long-boat of the
Durande was full when it left the unlucky vessel; that it was
certain to encounter great risks; that another man aboard
would have overloaded her, and perhaps caused her to founder;
and that these circumstances had no doubt weighed with Clubin
in coming to his determination to remain on the wreck. His
duty, however, once fulfilled, and a vessel at hand, Clubin
assuredly would not have scrupled to avail himself of its aid.
A hero is not necessarily an idiot. The idea of a suicide was
absurd in connection with a man of Clubin's irreproachable
character. The culprit, too, was Tangrouille, not Clubin. All
this was conclusive. The captain of the <i>Shealtiel</i> was evidently
right, and everybody expected to see Clubin reappear very
shortly. There was a project abroad to carry him through the
town in triumph.</p>

<p>Two things appeared certain from the narrative of the
captain: Clubin was saved, the Durande lost.</p>

<p>As regarded the Durande, there was nothing for it but to
accept the fact; the catastrophe was irremediable. The captain
of the <i>Shealtiel</i> had witnessed the last moments of the wreck.
The sharp rock on which the vessel had been, as it were, nailed,
had held her fast during the night, and resisted the shock of the
tempest as if reluctant to part with its prey; but in the morning,
at the moment when the captain of the <i>Shealtiel</i> had convinced
himself that there was no one aboard to be saved, and
was about to wear off again, one of those seas which are like the
last angry blows of a tempest had struck her. The wave lifted
her violently from her place, and with the swiftness and directness
of an arrow from a bow had thrown her against the two
Douvres rocks. "An infernal crash was heard," said the
captain. The vessel, lifted by the wave to a certain height, had
plunged between the two rocks up to her midship frame. She
had stuck fast again; but more firmly than on the submarine
rocks. She must have remained there suspended, and exposed
to every wind and sea.</p>

<p>The Durande, according to the statements of the crew of
the <i>Shealtiel</i>, was already three parts broken up. She would
evidently have foundered during the night, if the rocks had not
kept her up. The captain of the <i>Shealtiel</i> had watched her a
long time with his spyglass. He gave, with naval precision,
the details of her disaster. The starboard quarter beaten in,
the masts maimed, the sails blown from the bolt-ropes, the
shrouds torn away, the cabin sky-lights smashed by the falling
of one of the booms, the dome of the cuddy-house beaten in,
the chocks of the long-boat struck away, the round-house overturned,
the hinges of the rudder broken, the trusses wrenched
away, the quarter-cloths demolished, the bits gone, the cross-beam
destroyed, the shear-rails knocked off, the stern-post
broken. As to the parts of the cargo made fast before the foremast,
all destroyed, made a clean sweep of, gone to ten thousand
shivers, with top ropes, iron pulleys, and chains. The Durande
had broken her back; the sea now must break her up piecemeal.
In a few days there would be nothing of her remaining.</p>

<p>It appeared that the engine was scarcely injured by all these
ravages—a remarkable fact, and one which proved its excellence.
The captain of the <i>Shealtiel</i> thought he could affirm
that the crank had received no serious injury. The vessel's
masts had given way, but the funnel had resisted everything.
Only the iron guards of the captain's gangway were twisted;
the paddle boxes had suffered, the frames were bruised, but
the paddles had not a float missing. The machinery was intact.
Such was the conviction of the captain of the <i>Shealtiel</i>. Imbrancam,
the engineer, who was among the crowd, had the
same conviction. The negro, more intelligent than many of his
white companions, was proud of his engines. He lifted up his
arms, opening the ten fingers of his black hands, and said to
Lethierry, as he sat there silent, "Master, the machinery is
alive still!"</p>

<p>The safety of Clubin seeming certain, and the hull of the
Durande being already sacrificed, the engines became the topic
of conversation among the crowd. They took an interest in it
as in a living thing. They felt a delight in praising its good
qualities. "That's what I call a well-built machine," said a
French sailor. "Something like a good one," cried a Guernsey
fisherman. "She must have some good stuff in her," said the
captain of the <i>Shealtiel</i>, "to come out of that affair with only a
few scratches."</p>

<p>By degrees the machinery of the Durande became the absorbing
object of their thoughts. Opinions were warm for and
against. It had its enemies and its friends. More than one
who possessed a good old sailing cutter, and who hoped to get
a share of the business of the Durande, was not sorry to find
that the Douvres rock had disposed of the new invention. The
whispering became louder. The discussion grew noisy, though
the hubbub was evidently a little restrained; and now and
then there was a simultaneous lowering of voices out of respect
to Lethierry's death-like silence.</p>

<p>The result of the colloquy, so obstinately maintained on all
sides, was as follows:—</p>

<p>The engines were the vital part of the vessel. To rescue the
Durande was impossible; but the machinery might still be
saved. These engines were unique. To construct others
similar, the money was wanting; but to find the artificer would
have been still more difficult. It was remembered that the
constructor of the machinery was dead. It had cost forty
thousand francs. No one would risk again such a sum upon
such a chance: particularly as it was now discovered that
steamboats could be lost like other vessels. The accident of
the Durande destroyed the prestige of all her previous success.
Still, it was deplorable to think that at that very moment this
valuable mechanism was still entire and in good condition, and
that in five or six days it would probably go to pieces, like the
vessel herself. As long as this existed, it might almost be said
that there was no shipwreck. The loss of the engines was
alone irreparable. To save the machinery would be almost to
repair the disaster.</p>

<p>Save the machinery! It was easy to talk of it; but who
would undertake to do it? Was it possible, even? To scheme
and to execute are two different things; as different as to dream
and to do. Now if ever a dream had appeared wild and impracticable,
it was that of saving the engines then embedded
between the Douvres. The idea of sending a ship and a crew
to work upon those rocks was absurd. It could not be thought
of. It was the season of heavy seas. In the first gale the
chains of the anchors would be worn away and snapped upon the
submarine peaks, and the vessel must be shattered on the rocks.
That would be to send a second shipwreck to the relief of the
first. On the miserable narrow height where the legend of the
place described the shipwrecked sailor as having perished of
hunger, there was scarcely room for one person. To save the
engines, therefore, it would be necessary for a man to go to the
Douvres, to be alone in that sea, alone in that desert, alone at
five leagues from the coast, alone in that region of terrors, alone
for entire weeks, alone in the presence of dangers foreseen and
unforeseen—without supplies in the face of hunger and nakedness,
without succour in the time of distress, without token of
human life around him save the bleached bones of the miserable
being who had perished there in his misery, without companionship
save that of death. And besides, how was it possible to
extricate the machinery? It would require not only a sailor,
but an engineer; and for what trials must he not prepare. The
man who would attempt such a task must be more than a hero.
He must be a madman: for in certain enterprises, in which
superhuman power appears necessary, there is a sort of madness
which is more potent than courage. And after all, would it
not be a folly to immolate oneself for a mass of rusted iron.
No: it was certain that nobody would undertake to go to the
Douvres on such an errand. The engine must be abandoned
like the rest. The engineer for such a task would assuredly not
be forthcoming. Where, indeed, should they look for such
a man?</p>

<p>All this, or similar observations, formed the substance of
the confused conversations of the crowd.</p>

<p>The captain of the <i>Shealtiel</i>, who had been a pilot, summed
up the views of all by exclaiming aloud:—</p>

<p>"No; it is all over. The man does not exist who could go
there and rescue the machinery of the Durande."</p>

<p>"If I don't go," said Imbrancam, "it is because nobody
could do it."</p>

<p>The captain of the <i>Shealtiel</i> shook his left hand in the air
with that sudden movement which expresses a conviction that
a thing is impossible.</p>

<p>"If he existed—" continued the captain.</p>

<p>Déruchette turned her head impulsively, and interrupted.</p>

<p>"I would marry him," she said, innocently.</p>

<p>There was a pause.</p>

<p>A man made his way out of the crowd, and standing before
her, pale and anxious, said:</p>

<p>"You would marry him, Miss Déruchette?"</p>

<p>It was Gilliatt.</p>

<p>All eyes were turned towards him. Mess Lethierry had just
before stood upright, and gazed about him. His eyes glittered
with a strange light.</p>

<p>He took off his sailor's cap, and threw it on the ground:
then looked solemnly before him, and without seeing any of the
persons present, said:</p>

<p>"Déruchette should be his. I pledge myself to it in God's
name."</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>II</h4>

<h5>MUCH ASTONISHMENT ON THE WESTERN COAST</h5>


<p>The full moon rose at ten o'clock on the following night; but
however fine the night, however favourable the wind and sea,
no fisherman thought of going out that evening either from
Hogue la Perre, or Bourdeaux harbour, or Houmet Benet, or
Platon, or Port Grat, or Vazon Bay, or Perrelle Bay, or Pezeries,
or the Tielles or Saints' Bay, or Little Bo, or any other port or
little harbour in Guernsey; and the reason was very simple. A
cock had been heard to crow at noonday.</p>

<p>When the cock is heard to crow at an extraordinary hour,
fishing is suspended.</p>

<p>At dusk on that evening, however, a fisherman returning to
Omptolle, met with a remarkable adventure. On the height
above Houmet Paradis, beyond the Two Brayes and the Two
Grunes, stands to the left the beacon of the Plattes Tougères,
representing a tub reversed; and to the right, the beacon of
St. Sampson, representing the face of a man. Between these
two, the fisherman thought that he perceived for the first time
a third beacon. What could be the meaning of this beacon?
When had it been erected on that point? What shoal did it
indicate? The beacon responded immediately to these interrogations.
It moved, it was a mast. The astonishment of
the fisherman did not diminish. A beacon would have been
remarkable; a mast was still more so: it could not be a fishing-boat.
When everybody else was returning, some boat was
going out. Who could it be? and what was he about?</p>

<p>Ten minutes later the vessel, moving slowly, came within a
short distance of the Omptolle fisherman. He did not recognise
it. He heard the sound of rowing: there were evidently only
two oars. There was probably, then, only one man aboard.
The wind was northerly. The man, therefore, was evidently
paddling along in order to take the wind off Point Fontenelle.
There he would probably take to his sails. He intended then
to double the Ancresse and Mount Crevel. What could that
mean?</p>

<p>The vessel passed, the fisherman returned home. On that
same night, at different hours, and at different points, various
persons scattered and isolated on the western coast of Guernsey,
observed certain facts.</p>

<p>As the Omptolle fisherman was mooring his bark, a carter of
seaweed about half-a-mile off, whipping his horses along the
lonely road from the Clôtures near the Druid stones, and in the
neighbourhood of the Martello Towers 6 and 7, saw far off at
sea, in a part little frequented, because it requires much knowledge
of the waters, and in the direction of North Rock and the
Jablonneuse, a sail being hoisted. He paid little attention to
the circumstance, not being a seaman, but a carter of seaweed.</p>

<p>Half-an-hour had perhaps elapsed since the carter had perceived
this vessel, when a plasterer returning from his work in
the town, and passing round Pelée Pool, found himself suddenly
opposite a vessel sailing boldly among the rocks of the Quenon,
the Rousse de Mer, and the Gripe de Rousse. The night was
dark, but the sky was light over the sea, an effect common
enough; and he could distinguish a great distance in every
direction. There was no sail visible except this vessel.</p>

<p>A little lower, a gatherer of crayfish, preparing his fish wells
on the beach which separates Port Soif from the Port Enfer,
was puzzled to make out the movements of a vessel between
the Boue Corneille and the Moubrette. The man must have
been a good pilot, and in great haste to reach some destination
to risk his boat there.</p>

<p>Just as eight o'clock was striking at the Catel, the tavern-keeper
at Cobo Bay observed with astonishment a sail out
beyond the Boue du Jardin and the Grunettes, and very near
the Susanne and the Western Grunes.</p>

<p>Not far from Cobo Bay, upon the solitary point of the Houmet
of Vason Bay, two lovers were lingering, hesitating before they
parted for the night. The young woman addressed the young
man with the words, "I am not going because I don't care to
stay with you: I've a great deal to do." Their farewell kiss was
interrupted by a good sized sailing boat which passed very near
them, making for the direction of the Messellettes.</p>

<p>Monsieur le Peyre des Norgiots, an inhabitant of Cotillon
Pipet, was engaged about nine o'clock in the evening in examining
a hole made by some trespassers in the hedge of his property
called La Jennerotte, and his "<i>friquet</i> planted with trees."
Even while ascertaining the amount of the damage, he could
not help observing a fishing-boat audaciously making its way
round the Crocq Point at that hour of night.</p>

<p>On the morrow of a tempest, when there is always some
agitation upon the sea, that route was extremely unsafe. It
was rash to choose it, at least, unless the steersman knew all
the channels by heart.</p>

<p>At half-past nine o'clock, at L'Equerrier, a trawler carrying
home his net stopped for a time to observe between Colombelle
and the Soufleresse something which looked like a boat. The
boat was in a dangerous position. Sudden gusts of wind of a
very dangerous kind are very common in that spot. The
<i>Soufleresse</i>, or Blower, derives its name from the sudden gusts
of wind which it seems to direct upon the vessels, which by rare
chance find their way thither.</p>

<p>At the moment when the moon was rising, the tide being
high and the sea being quiet, in the little strait of Li-Hou, the
solitary keeper of the island of Li-Hou was considerably startled.
A long black object slowly passed between the moon and him.
This dark form, high and narrow, resembled a winding-sheet
spread out and moving. It glided along the line of the top of
the wall formed by the ridges of rock. The keeper of Li-Hou
fancied that he had beheld the Black Lady.</p>

<p>The White Lady inhabits the Tau de Pez d'Amont; the
Grey Lady, the Tau de Pez d'Aval; the Red Lady, the Silleuse,
to the north of the Marquis Bank; and the Black Lady, the
Grand Etacré, to the west of Li-Houmet. At night, when the
moon shines, these ladies stalk abroad, and sometimes meet.</p>

<p>That dark form might undoubtedly be a sail. The long
groups of rocks on which she appeared to be walking, might
in fact be concealing the hull of a bark navigating behind them,
and allowing only her sail to be seen. But the keeper asked
himself, what bark would dare, at that hour, to venture herself
between Li-Hou and the Pécheresses, and the Anguillières and
Lérée Point? And what object could she have? It seemed
to him much more probable that it was the Black Lady.</p>

<p>As the moon was passing the clock-tower of St. Peter in the
Wood, the serjeant at Castle Rocquaine, while in the act of
raising the drawbridge of the castle, distinguished at the end
of the bay beyond the Haute Canée, but nearer than the Sambule,
a sailing-vessel which seemed to be steadily dropping
down from north to south.</p>

<p>On the southern coast of Guernsey behind Pleinmont, in the
curve of a bay composed entirely of precipices and rocky walls
rising peak-shaped from the sea, there is a singular landing-place,
to which a French gentleman, a resident of the island since
1855, has given the name of "The Port on the Fourth Floor,"
a name now generally adopted. This port, or landing-place,
which was then called the Moie, is a rocky plateau half-formed
by nature, half by art, raised about forty feet above the level
of the waves, and communicating with the water by two large
beams laid parallel in the form of an inclined plane. The
fishing-vessels are hoisted up there by chains and pulleys from
the sea, and are let down again in the same way along these
beams, which are like two rails. For the fishermen there is a
ladder. The port was, at the time of our story, much frequented
by the smugglers. Being difficult of access, it was well suited
to their purposes.</p>

<p>Towards eleven o'clock, some smugglers—perhaps the same
upon whose aid Clubin had counted—stood with their bales of
goods on the summit of this platform of the Moie. A smuggler
is necessarily a man on the look out, it is part of his business to
watch. They were astonished to perceive a sail suddenly make
its appearance beyond the dusky outline of Cape Pleinmont.
It was moonlight. The smugglers observed the sail narrowly,
suspecting that it might be some coast-guard cutter about to
lie in ambush behind the Great Hanway. But the sail left the
Hanways behind, passed to the north-west of the Boue Blondel,
and was lost in the pale mists of the horizon out at sea.</p>

<p>"Where the devil can that boat be sailing?" asked the
smuggler.</p>

<p>That same evening, a little after sunset, some one had been
heard knocking at the door of the old house of the Bû de la Rue.
It was a boy wearing brown clothes and yellow stockings, a
fact that indicated that he was a little parish clerk. An old
fisherwoman prowling about the shore with a lantern in her
hand, had called to the boy, and this dialogue ensued between
the fisherwoman and the little clerk, before the entrance to the
Bû de la Rue:—</p>

<p>"What d'ye want, lad?"</p>

<p>"The man of this place."</p>

<p>"He's not there."</p>

<p>"Where is he?"</p>

<p>"I don't know."</p>

<p>"Will he be there to-morrow?"</p>

<p>"I don't know."</p>

<p>"Is he gone away?"</p>

<p>"I don't know."</p>

<p>"I've come, good woman, from the new rector of the parish,
the Reverend Ebenezer Caudray, who desires to pay him a
visit."</p>

<p>"I don't know where he is."</p>

<p>"The rector sent me to ask if the man who lives at the Bû
de la Rue would be at home to-morrow morning."</p>

<p>"I don't know."</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>III</h4>

<h5>A QUOTATION FROM THE BIBLE</h5>


<p>During the twenty-four hours which followed, Mess Lethierry
slept not, ate nothing, drank nothing. He kissed Déruchette
on the forehead, asked after Clubin, of whom there was as yet
no news, signed a declaration certifying that he had no intention
of preferring a charge against anyone, and set Tangrouille at
liberty.</p>

<p>All the morning of the next day he remained half supporting
himself on the table of the office of the Durande, neither standing
nor sitting: answering kindly when anyone spoke to him.
Curiosity being satisfied, the Bravées had become a solitude.
There is a good deal of curiosity generally mingled with the
haste of condolences. The door had closed again, and left the
old man again alone with Déruchette. The strange light that
had shone in Lethierry's eyes was extinguished. The mournful
look which filled them after the first news of the disaster had
returned.</p>

<p>Déruchette, anxious for his sake, had, on the advice of Grace
and Douce, laid silently beside him a pair of stockings, which
he had been knitting, sailor fashion, when the bad news had
arrived.</p>

<p>He smiled bitterly, and said:</p>

<p>"They must think me foolish."</p>

<p>After a quarter of an hour's silence, he added:</p>

<p>"These things are well when you are happy."</p>

<p>Déruchette carried away the stockings, and took advantage
of the opportunity to remove also the compass and the ship's
papers which Lethierry had been brooding over too long.</p>

<p>In the afternoon, a little before tea-time, the door opened and
two strangers entered, attired in black. One was old, the other
young.</p>

<p>The young one has, perhaps, already been observed in the
course of this story.</p>

<p>The two men had each a grave air; but their gravity appeared
different. The old man possessed what might be called state
gravity; the gravity of the young man was in his nature. Habit
engenders the one; thought the other.</p>

<p>They were, as their costume indicated, two clergymen, each
belonging to the Established Church.</p>

<p>The first fact in the appearance of the younger man which
might have first struck the observer was, that his gravity,
though conspicuous in the expression of his features, and
evidently springing from the mind, was not indicated by his
person. Gravity is not inconsistent with passion, which it
exalts by purifying it; but the idea of gravity could with difficulty
be associated with an exterior remarkable above all for
personal beauty. Being in holy orders, he must have been at
least four-and-twenty, but he seemed scarcely more than
eighteen. He possessed those gifts at once in harmony with,
and in opposition to, each other. A soul which seemed created
for exalted passion, and a body created for love. He was fair,
rosy-fresh, slim, and elegant in his severe attire, and he had the
cheeks of a young girl, and delicate hands. His movements
were natural and lively, though subdued. Everything about
him was pleasing, elegant, almost voluptuous. The beauty of
his expression served to correct this excess of personal attraction.
His open smile, which showed his teeth, regular and white as
those of a child, had something in it pensive, even devotional.
He had the gracefulness of a page, mingled with the dignity of
a bishop.</p>

<p>His fair hair, so fair and golden as to be almost effeminate,
clustered over his white forehead, which was high and well-formed.
A slight double line between the eyebrows awakened
associations with studious thought.</p>

<p>Those who saw him felt themselves in the presence of one of
those natures, benevolent, innocent, and pure, whose progress
is in inverse sense with that of vulgar minds; natures whom
illusion renders wise, and whom experience makes enthusiasts.</p>

<p>His older companion was no other than Doctor Jaquemin
Hérode. Doctor Jaquemin Hérode belonged to the High
Church; a party whose system is a sort of popery without a
pope. The Church of England was at that epoch labouring
with the tendencies which have since become strengthened and
condensed in the form of Puseyism. Doctor Jaquemin Hérode
belonged to that shade of Anglicanism which is almost a variety
of the Church of Rome. He was haughty, precise, stiff, and
commanding. His inner sight scarcely penetrated outwardly.
He possessed the letter in the place of the spirit. His manner
was arrogant; his presence imposing. He had less the appearance
of a "Reverend" than of a <i>Monsignore</i>. His frock-coat
was cut somewhat in the fashion of a cassock. His true centre
would have been Rome. He was a born Prelate of the Antechamber.
He seemed to have been created expressly to fill a
part in the Papal Court, to walk behind the Pontifical litter,
with all the Court of Rome in <i>abitto paonazzo</i>. The accident of
his English birth and his theological education, directed more
towards the Old than the New Testament, had deprived him of
that destiny. All his splendours were comprised in his preferments
as Rector of St. Peter's Port, Dean of the Island of
Guernsey, and Surrogate of the Bishop of Winchester. These
were, undoubtedly, not without their glories. These glories
did not prevent M. Jaquemin Hérode being, on the whole, a
worthy man.</p>

<p>As a theologian he was esteemed by those who were able to
judge of such matters; he was almost an authority in the Court
of Arches—that Sorbonne of England.</p>

<p>He had the true air of erudition; a learned contraction of the
eyes; bristling nostrils; teeth which showed themselves at all
times; a thin upper lip and a thick lower one. He was the
possessor of several learned degrees, a valuable prebend, titled
friends, the confidence of the bishop, and a Bible, which he
carried always in his pocket.</p>

<p>Mess Lethierry was so completely absorbed that the entrance
of the two priests produced no effect upon him, save a slight
movement of the eyebrows.</p>

<p>M. Jaquemin Hérode advanced, bowed, alluded in a few sober
and dignified words to his recent promotion, and mentioned
that he came according to custom to introduce among the
inhabitants, and to Mess Lethierry in particular, his successor
in the parish, the new Rector of St. Sampson, the Rev. Ebenezer
Caudray, henceforth the pastor of Mess Lethierry.</p>

<p>Déruchette rose.</p>

<p>The young clergyman, who was the Rev. Ebenezer, saluted her.</p>

<p>Mess Lethierry regarded Monsieur Ebenezer Caudray, and
muttered, "A bad sailor."</p>

<p>Grace placed chairs. The two visitors seated themselves near
the table.</p>

<p>Doctor Hérode commenced a discourse. It had reached his
ears that a serious misfortune had befallen his host. The
Durande had been lost. He came as Lethierry's pastor to offer
condolence and advice. This shipwreck was unfortunate, and
yet not without compensations. Let us examine our own hearts.
Are we not puffed up with prosperity? The waters of felicity
are dangerous. Troubles must be submitted to cheerfully.
The ways of Providence are mysterious. Mess Lethierry was
ruined, perhaps. But riches were a danger. You may have
false friends; poverty will disperse them, and leave you alone.
The Durande was reported to have brought a revenue of one
thousand pounds sterling per annum. It was more than enough
for the wise. Let us fly from temptations; put not our faith in
gold; bow the head to losses and neglect. Isolation is full of
good fruits. It was in solitude that Ajah discovered the warm
springs while leading the asses of his father Zibeon. Let us not
rebel against the inscrutable decrees of Providence. The holy
man Job, after his misery, had put faith in riches. Who can
say that the loss of the Durande may not have its advantages
even of a temporal kind. He, for instance, Doctor Jaquemin
Hérode had invested some money in an excellent enterprise, now
in progress at Sheffield. If Mess Lethierry, with the wealth
which might still remain to him, should choose to embark in
the same affair, he might transfer his capital to that town. It
was an extensive manufactory of arms for the supply of the Czar,
now engaged in repressing insurrection in Poland. There was
a good prospect of obtaining three hundred per cent. profit.</p>

<p>The word Czar appeared to awaken Lethierry. He interrupted
Dr. Hérode.</p>

<p>"I want nothing to do with the Czar."</p>

<p>The Reverend Jaquemin Hérode replied:</p>

<p>"Mess Lethierry, princes are recognised by God. It is
written, 'Render unto Cæsar the things which are Cæsar's.'
The Czar is Cæsar."</p>

<p>Lethierry partly relapsed into his dream and muttered:</p>

<p>"Cæsar? who is Cæsar? I don't know."</p>

<p>The Rev. Jaquemin Hérode continued his exhortations. He
did not press the question of Sheffield.</p>

<p>To contemn a Cæsar was republicanism. He could understand
a man being a republican. In that case he could turn his
thoughts towards a republic. Mess Lethierry might repair his
fortune in the United States, even better than in England. If
he desired to invest what remained to him at great profit, he
had only to take shares in the great company for developing the
resources of Texas, which employed more than twenty thousand
negroes.</p>

<p>"I want nothing to do with slavery," said Lethierry.</p>

<p>"Slavery," replied the Reverend Hérode, "is an institution
recognised by Scripture. It is written, 'If a man smite his
slave, he shall not be punished, for he is his money.'"</p>

<p>Grace and Douce at the door of the room listened in a sort
of ecstacy to the words of the Reverend Doctor.</p>

<p>The doctor continued. He was, all things considered, as we
have said, a worthy man; and whatever his differences, personal
or connected with caste, with Mess Lethierry, he had come very
sincerely to offer him that spiritual and even temporal aid which
he, Doctor Jaquemin Hérode, dispensed.</p>

<p>If Mess Lethierry's fortune had been diminished to that point
that he was unable to take a beneficial part in any speculation,
Russian or American, why should he not obtain some government
appointment suited to him? There were many very
respectable places open to him, and the reverend gentleman was
ready to recommend him. The office of Deputy-Vicomte was
just vacant. Mess Lethierry was popular and respected, and
the Reverend Jaquemin Hérode, Dean of Guernsey and Surrogate
of the Bishop, would make an effort to obtain for Mess
Lethierry this post. The Deputy-Vicomte is an important
officer. He is present as the representative of His Majesty at
the holding of the Sessions, at the debates of the <i>Cohue</i>, and at
executions of justice.</p>

<p>Lethierry fixed his eye upon Doctor Hérode.</p>

<p>"I don't like hanging," he said.</p>

<p>Doctor Hérode, who, up to this point, had pronounced his
words with the same intonation, had now a fit of severity; his
tone became slightly changed.</p>

<p>"Mess Lethierry, the pain of death is of divine ordination.
God has placed the sword in the hands of governors. It is
written, 'An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth.'"</p>

<p>The Reverend Ebenezer imperceptibly drew his chair nearer
to the Reverend Doctor and said, so as to be heard only by him:</p>

<p>"What this man says, is dictated to him."</p>

<p>"By whom? By what?" demanded the Reverend Jaquemin
Hérode, in the same tone.</p>

<p>The young man replied in a whisper, "By his conscience."</p>

<p>The Reverend Jaquemin Hérode felt in his pocket, drew out
a thick little bound volume with clasps, and said aloud:</p>

<p>"Conscience is here."</p>

<p>The book was a Bible.</p>

<p>Then Doctor Hérode's tone became softer. "His wish was
to render a service to Mess Lethierry, whom he respected much.
As his pastor, it was his right and duty to offer counsel. Mess
Lethierry, however, was free."</p>

<p>Mess Lethierry, plunged once more in his overwhelming
absorption, no longer listened. Déruchette, seated near him,
and thoughtful, also did not raise her eyes, and by her silent
presence somewhat increased the embarrassment of a conversation
not very animated. A witness who says nothing is a species
of indefinable weight. Doctor Hérode, however, did not appear
to feel it.</p>

<p>Lethierry no longer replying, Doctor Hérode expatiated
freely. Counsel is from man; inspiration is from God. In the
counsels of the priests there is inspiration. It is good to accept,
dangerous to refuse them. Sochoh was seized by eleven devils
for disdaining the exhortations of Nathaniel. Tiburianus was
struck with a leprosy for having driven from his house the
Apostle Andrew. Barjesus, a magician though he was, was
punished with blindness for having mocked at the words of
St. Paul. Elxai and his sisters, Martha and Martena, are in
eternal torments for despising the warnings of Valentianus,
who proved to them clearly that their Jesus Christ, thirty-eight
leagues in height, was a demon. Aholibamah, who is also
called Judith, obeyed the Councils, Reuben and Peniel listened
to the counsels from on high, as their names indeed indicate.
Reuben signifies son of the vision; and Peniel, "the face of God.":</p>

<p>Mess Lethierry struck the table with his fist.</p>

<p>"Parbleu!" he cried; "it was my fault."</p>

<p>"What do you mean?" asked M. Jaquemin Hérode.</p>

<p>"I say that it is my fault."</p>

<p>"Your fault? Why?"</p>

<p>"Because I allowed the Durande to return on Fridays."</p>

<p>M. Jaquemin Hérode whispered in Caudray's ear:</p>

<p>"This man is superstitious."</p>

<p>He resumed, raising his voice, and in a didactic tone:</p>

<p>"Mess Lethierry, it is puerile to believe in Fridays. You
ought not to put faith in fables. Friday is a day just like any
other. It is very often a propitious day. Melendez founded
the city of Saint Augustin on a Friday; it was on a Friday that
Henry the Seventh gave his commission to John Cabot; the
Pilgrims of the <i>Mayflower</i> landed at Province Town on a Friday.
Washington was born on Friday, the 22nd of February 1732;
Christopher Columbus discovered America on Friday, the 12th
of October 1492."</p>

<p>Having delivered himself of these remarks, he rose.</p>

<p>Caudray, whom he had brought with him, rose also.</p>

<p>Grace and Douce, perceiving that the two clergymen were
about to take their leave, opened the folding-doors.</p>

<p>Mess Lethierry saw nothing; heard nothing.</p>

<p>M. Jaquemin Hérode said, apart to M. Caudray:</p>

<p>"He does not even salute us. This is not sorrow; it is
vacancy. He must have lost his reason."</p>

<p>He took his little Bible, however, from the table, and held it
between his hands outstretched, as one holds a bird in fear that
it may fly away. This attitude awakened among the persons
present a certain amount of attention. Grace and Douce
leaned forward eagerly.</p>

<p>His voice assumed all the solemnity of which it was capable.</p>

<p>"Mess Lethierry," he began, "let us not part without reading
a page of the Holy Book. It is from books that wise men
derive consolation in the troubles of life. The profane have
their oracles; but believers have their ready resource in the
Bible. The first book which comes to hand, opened by chance
may afford counsel; but the Bible, opened at any page, yields
a revelation. It is, above all, a boon to the afflicted. Yes,
Holy Scripture is an unfailing balm for their wounds. In the
presence of affliction, it is good to consult its sacred pages—to
open even without choosing the place, and to read with faith
the passage which we find. What man does not choose is
chosen by God. He knoweth best what suiteth us. His finger
pointeth invisibly to that which we read. Whatever be the
page, it will infallibly enlighten. Let us seek, then, no other
light; but hold fast to His. It is the word from on high. In
the text which is evoked with confidence and reverence, often
do we find a mysterious significance in our present troubles. Let
us hearken, then, and obey. Mess Lethierry, you are in affliction,
but I hold here the book of consolation. You are sick at heart,
but I have here the book of spiritual health."</p>

<p>The Reverend Jaquemin Hérode touched the spring of the
clasp, and let his finger slip between the leaves. Then he placed
his hand a moment upon the open volume, collected his thoughts,
and, raising his eyes impressively, began to read in a loud voice.</p>

<p>The passage which he had lighted on was as follows:</p>

<p>"And Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the eventide,
and he lifted up his eyes and saw and beheld the camels were
coming.</p>

<p>"And Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac
she lighted off the camel.</p>

<p>"For she had said unto the servant, What man is this that
walketh in the field to meet us?</p>

<p>"And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent, and
took Rebekah, and she became his wife, and he loved her; and
Isaac was comforted after his mother's death."</p>

<p>Caudray and Déruchette glanced at each other.</p>
