<h4>I</h4>

<h5>A WORD WRITTEN ON A WHITE PAGE</h5>


<p>Christmas Day in the year 182- was somewhat remarkable
in the island of Guernsey. Snow fell on that day. In the
Channel Islands a frosty winter is uncommon, and a fall of
snow is an event.</p>

<p>On that Christmas morning, the road which skirts the seashore
from St. Peter's Port to the Vale was clothed in white.
From midnight till the break of day the snow had been falling.
Towards nine o'clock, a little after the rising of the wintry sun,
as it was too early yet for the Church of England folks to go to
St. Sampson's, or for the Wesleyans to repair to Eldad Chapel,
the road was almost deserted. Throughout that portion of the
highway which separates the first from the second tower, only
three foot-passengers could be seen. These were a child, a man,
and a woman. Walking at a distance from each other, these
wayfarers had no visible connection. The child, a boy of about
eight years old, had stopped, and was looking curiously at the
wintry scene. The man walked behind the woman, at a distance
of about a hundred paces. Like her he was coming from
the direction of the church of St. Sampson. The appearance of
the man, who was still young, was something between that of
a workman and a sailor. He wore his working-day clothes—a
kind of Guernsey shirt of coarse brown stuff, and trousers partly
concealed by tarpaulin leggings—a costume which seemed to
indicate that, notwithstanding the holy day, he was going to no
place of worship. His heavy shoes of rough leather, with their
soles covered with large nails, left upon the snow, as he walked,
a print more like that of a prison lock than the foot of a man.
The woman, on the contrary, was evidently dressed for church.
She wore a large mantle of black silk, wadded, under which she
had coquettishly adjusted a dress of Irish poplin, trimmed
alternately with white and pink; but for her red stockings, she
might have been taken for a Parisian. She walked on with a
light and free step, so little suggestive of the burden of life that
it might easily be seen that she was young. Her movements
possessed that subtle grace which indicates the most delicate
of all transitions—that soft intermingling, as it were, of two
twilights—the passage from the condition of a child to that of
womanhood. The man seemed to take no heed of her.</p>

<p>Suddenly, near a group of oaks at the corner of a field, and at
the spot called the Basses Maisons, she turned, and the movement
seemed to attract the attention of the man. She stopped,
seemed to reflect a moment, then stooped, and the man fancied
that he could discern that she was tracing with her finger some
letters in the snow. Then she rose again, went on her way at
a quicker pace, turned once more, this time smiling, and disappeared
to the left of the roadway, by the footpath under the
hedges which leads to the Ivy Castle. When she had turned for
the second time, the man had recognised her as Déruchette, a
charming girl of that neighbourhood.</p>

<p>The man felt no need of quickening his pace; and some
minutes later he found himself near the group of oaks. Already
he had ceased to think of the vanished Déruchette; and if, at
that moment, a porpoise had appeared above the water, or a
robin had caught his eye in the hedges, it is probable that he
would have passed on his way. But it happened that his eyes
were fixed upon the ground; his gaze fell mechanically upon
the spot where the girl had stopped. Two little footprints were
there plainly visible; and beside them he read this word,
evidently written by her in the snow—</p>

<p class="center">"GILLIATT."</p>

<p>It was his own name.</p>

<p>He lingered for awhile motionless, looking at the letters, the
little footprints, and the snow; and then walked on, evidently
in a thoughtful mood.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>II</h4>

<h5>THE BÛ DE LA RUE</h5>


<p>Gilliatt lived in the parish of St. Sampson. He was not liked
by his neighbours; and there were reasons for that fact.</p>

<p>To begin with, he lived in a queer kind of "haunted" dwelling.
In the islands of Jersey and Guernsey, sometimes in the country,
but often in streets with many inhabitants, you will come upon
a house the entrance to which is completely barricaded. Holly
bushes obstruct the doorway, hideous boards, with nails, conceal
the windows below; while the casements of the upper stories
are neither closed nor open: for all the window-frames are
barred, but the glass is broken. If there is a little yard, grass
grows between its stones; and the parapet of its wall is crumbling
away. If there is a garden, it is choked with nettles, brambles,
and hemlock, and strange insects abound in it. The chimneys
are cracked, the roof is falling in; so much as can be seen from
without of the rooms presents a dismantled appearance. The
woodwork is rotten; the stone mildewed. The paper of the
walls has dropped away and hangs loose, until it presents a
history of the bygone fashions of paper-hangings—the scrawling
patterns of the time of the Empire, the crescent-shaped draperies
of the Directory, the balustrades and pillars of the days of
Louis XVI. The thick draperies of cobwebs, filled with flies,
indicate the quiet reign long enjoyed by innumerable spiders.
Sometimes a broken jug may be noticed on a shelf. Such
houses are considered to be haunted. Satan is popularly believed
to visit them by night. Houses are like the human beings
who inhabit them. They become to their former selves what
the corpse is to the living body. A superstitious belief among
the people is sufficient to reduce them to this state of death.
Then their aspect is terrible. These ghostly houses are common
in the Channel Islands.</p>

<p>The rural and maritime populations are easily moved with
notions of the active agency of the powers of evil. Among the
Channel Isles, and on the neighbouring coast of France, the
ideas of the people on this subject are deeply rooted. In their
view, Beelzebub has his ministers in all parts of the earth. It
is certain that Belphegor is the ambassador from the infernal
regions in France, Hutgin in Italy, Belial in Turkey, Thamuz
in Spain, Martinet in Switzerland, and Mammon in England.
Satan is an Emperor just like any other: a sort of Satan Cæsar.
His establishment is well organised. Dagon is grand almoner,
Succor Benoth chief of the Eunuchs; Asmodeus, banker at the
gaming-table; Kobal, manager of the theatre, and Verdelet,
grand-master of the ceremonies. Nybbas is the court-fool;
Wierus, a savant, a good strygologue, and a man of much learning
in demonology, calls Nybbas the great parodist.</p>

<p>The Norman fishermen, who frequent the Channel, have many
precautions to take at sea, by reason of the illusions with which
Satan environs them. It has long been an article of popular
faith, that Saint Maclou inhabited the great square rock called
Ortach, in the sea between Aurigny and the Casquets; and
many old sailors used to declare that they had often seen him
there, seated and reading in a book. Accordingly the sailors,
as they passed, were in the habit of kneeling many times before
the Ortach rock, until the day when the fable was destroyed,
and the truth took its place. For it has been discovered, and
is now well established, that the lonely inhabitant of the rock
is not a saint, but a devil. This evil spirit, whose name is
Jochmus, had the impudence to pass himself off, for many
centuries, as Saint Maclou. Even the Church herself is not
proof against snares of this kind. The demons Raguhel, Oribel,
and Tobiel, were regarded as saints until the year 745; when
Pope Zachary, having at length exposed them, turned them
out of saintly company. This sort of weeding of the saintly
calendar is certainly very useful; but it can only be practised
by very accomplished judges of devils and their ways.</p>

<p>The old inhabitants of these parts relate—though all this
refers to bygone times—that the Catholic population of the
Norman Archipelago was once, though quite involuntarily, even
in more intimate correspondence with the powers of darkness
than the Huguenots themselves. How this happened, however,
we do not pretend to say; but it is certain that the people
suffered considerable annoyance from this cause. It appears
that Satan had taken a fancy to the Catholics, and sought their
company a good deal; a circumstance which has given rise to
the belief that the devil is more Catholic than Protestant. One
of his most insufferable familiarities consisted in paying nocturnal
visits to married Catholics in bed, just at the moment when the
husband had fallen fast asleep, and the wife had begun to doze;
a fruitful source of domestic trouble. Patouillet was of opinion
that a faithful biography of Voltaire ought not to be without
some allusion to this practice of the evil one. The truth of all
this is perfectly well known, and described in the forms of excommunication
in the rubric <i>de erroribus nocturnis et de semine
diabolorum</i>. The practice was raging particularly at St. Helier's
towards the end of the last century, probably as a punishment
for the Revolution; for the evil consequences of revolutionary
excesses are incalculable. However this may have been, it is
certain that this possibility of a visit from the demon at night,
when it is impossible to see distinctly, or even in slumber,
caused much embarrassment among orthodox dames. The idea
of giving to the world a Voltaire was by no means a pleasant
one. One of these, in some anxiety, consulted her confessor
on this extremely difficult subject, and the best mode for timely
discovery of the cheat. The confessor replied, "In order to be
sure that it is your husband by your side, and not a demon,
place your hand upon his head. If you find horns, you may
be sure there is something wrong." But this test was far from
satisfactory to the worthy dame.</p>

<p>Gilliatt's house had been haunted, but it was no longer in
that condition; it was for that reason, however, only regarded
with more suspicion. No one learned in demonology can be
unaware of the fact that, when a sorcerer has installed himself
in a haunted dwelling, the devil considers the house sufficiently
occupied, and is polite enough to abstain from visiting there,
unless called in, like the doctor, on some special occasion.</p>

<p>This house was known by the name of the Bû de la Rue.
It was situated at the extremity of a little promontory, rather
of rock than of land, forming a small harbourage apart in the
creek of Houmet Paradis. The water at this spot is deep.
The house stood quite alone upon the point, almost separated
from the island, and with just sufficient ground about it for a
small garden, which was sometimes inundated by the high tides.
Between the port of St. Sampson and the creek of Houmet
Paradis, rises a steep hill, surmounted by the block of towers
covered with ivy, and known as Vale Castle, or the Château de
l'Archange; so that, at St. Sampson, the Bû de la Rue was
shut out from sight.</p>

<p>Nothing is commoner than sorcerers in Guernsey. They
exercise their profession in certain parishes, in profound indifference
to the enlightenment of the nineteenth century.
Some of their practices are downright criminal. They set gold
boiling, they gather herbs at midnight, they cast sinister looks
upon the people's cattle. When the people consult them they
send for bottles containing "water of the sick," and they are
heard to mutter mysteriously, "the water has a sad look." In
March, 1857, one of them discovered, in water of this kind,
seven demons. They are universally feared. Another only
lately bewitched a baker "as well as his oven." Another had
the diabolical wickedness to wafer and seal up envelopes "containing
nothing inside." Another went so far as to have on a
shelf three bottles labelled "B." These monstrous facts are
well authenticated. Some of these sorcerers are obliging, and
for two or three guineas will take on themselves the complaint
from which you are suffering. Then they are seen to roll upon
their beds, and to groan with pain; and while they are in these
agonies the believer exclaims, "There! I am well again."
Others cure all kinds of diseases, by merely tying a handkerchief
round the patient's loins, a remedy so simple that it is astonishing
that no one had yet thought of it. In the last century, the
Cour Royale of Guernsey bound such folks upon a heap of fagots
and burnt them alive. In these days it condemns them to eight
weeks' imprisonment; four weeks on bread and water, and the
remainder of the term in solitary confinement. <i>Amant alterna
catenæ.</i></p>

<p>The last instance of burning sorcerers in Guernsey took place
in 1747. The city authorities devoted one of its squares, the
Carrefour du Bordage, to that ceremony. Between 1565 and
1700, eleven sorcerers thus suffered at this spot. As a rule the
criminals made confession of their guilt. Torture was used to
assist their confession. The Carrefour du Bordage has indeed
rendered many other services to society and religion. It was
here that heretics were brought to the stake. Under Queen
Mary, among other Huguenots burnt here, were a mother and
two daughters. The name of this mother was Perrotine Massy.
One of the daughters was <i>enceinte</i>, and was delivered of a child
even in the midst of the flames. As the old chronicle expresses
it, "<i>Son ventre éclata</i>." The new-born infant rolled out of the
fiery furnace. A man named House took it in his arms; but
Helier Gosselin the bailli, like a good Catholic as he was, sternly
commanded the child to be cast again into the fire.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>III</h4>

<h5>FOR YOUR WIFE: WHEN YOU MARRY</h5>


<p>We must return to Gilliatt.</p>

<p>The country people told how, towards the close of the great
Revolution, a woman, bringing with her a little child, came to
live in Guernsey. She was English, or perhaps French. She
had a name which the Guernsey pronunciation and the country
folks' bad spelling had finally converted into "Gilliatt." She
lived alone with the child, which, according to some, was a
nephew; according to others, a son or grandson; according to
others, again, a strange child whom she was protecting. She
had some means; enough to struggle on in a poor way. She
had purchased a small plot of ground at La Sergentée, and
another at La Roque Crespel, near Rocquaine. The house of
the Bû de la Rue was haunted at this period. For more than
thirty years no one had inhabited it. It was falling into ruins.
The garden, so often invaded by the sea, could produce nothing.
Besides noises and lights seen there at night-time, the house
had this mysterious peculiarity: any one who should leave there
in the evening, upon the mantelpiece, a ball of worsted, a few
needles, and a plate filled with soup, would assuredly find, in
the morning, the soup consumed, the plate empty, and a pair
of mittens ready knitted. The house, demon included, was
offered for sale for a few pounds sterling. The stranger woman
became the purchaser, evidently tempted by the devil, or by
the advantageous bargain.</p>

<p>She did more than purchase the house; she took up her
abode there with the child; and from that moment peace reigned
within its walls. The Bû de la Rue has found a fit tenant, said
the country people. The haunting ceased. There was no
longer any light seen there, save that of the tallow candle of
the new comer. "Witch's candle is as good as devil's torch."
The proverb satisfied the gossips of the neighbourhood.</p>

<p>The woman cultivated some acres of land which belonged
to her. She had a good cow, of the sort which produces yellow
butter. She gathered her white beans, cauliflowers, and
"Golden drop" potatoes. She sold, like other people, her
parsnips by the tonneau, her onions by the hundred, and her
beans by the denerel. She did not go herself to market, but
disposed of her crops through the agency of Guilbert Falliot, at
the sign of the Abreveurs of St. Sampson. The register of
Falliot bears evidence that Falliot sold for her, on one occasion,
as much as twelve bushels of rare early potatoes.</p>

<p>The house had been meanly repaired; but sufficiently to
make it habitable. It was only in very bad weather that the
rain-drops found their way through the ceilings of the rooms.
The interior consisted of a ground-floor suite of rooms, and a
granary overhead. The ground-floor was divided into three
rooms; two for sleeping, and one for meals. A ladder connected
it with the granary above. The woman attended to the kitchen
and taught the child to read. She did not go to church or chapel,
which, all things considered, led to the conclusion that she must
be French not to go to a place of worship. The circumstance
was grave. In short, the new comers were a puzzle to the
neighbourhood.</p>

<p>That the woman was French seemed probable. Volcanoes
cast forth stones, and revolutions men, so families are removed
to distant places; human beings come to pass their lives far
from their native homes; groups of relatives and friends disperse
and decay; strange people fall, as it were, from the clouds—some
in Germany, some in England, some in America. The
people of the country view them with surprise and curiosity.
Whence come these strange faces? Yonder mountain, smoking
with revolutionary fires, casts them out. These barren aërolites,
these famished and ruined people, these footballs of destiny,
are known as refugees, émigrés, adventurers. If they sojourn
among strangers, they are tolerated; if they depart, there is a
feeling of relief. Sometimes these wanderers are harmless,
inoffensive people, strangers—at least, as regards the women—to
the events which have led to their exile, objects of persecution,
helpless and astonished at their fate. They take root again
somewhere as they can. They have done no harm to any one,
and scarcely comprehend the destiny that has befallen them.
So thus I have seen a poor tuft of grass uprooted and carried
away by the explosion of a mine. No great explosion was ever
followed by more of such strays than the first French Revolution.</p>

<p>The strange woman whom the Guernsey folks called
"Gilliatt" was, possibly, one of these human strays.</p>

<p>The woman grew older; the child became a youth. They
lived alone and avoided by all; but they were sufficient for
each other. <i>Louve et louveteau se pourlèchent.</i> This was
another of the generous proverbs which the neighbourhood
applied to them. Meanwhile, the youth grew to manhood;
and then, as the old and withered bark falls from the tree, the
mother died. She left to her son the little field of Sergentée,
the small property called La Roque Crespel, and the house
known as the Bû de la Rue; with the addition, as the official
inventory said, of "one hundred guineas in gold in the <i>pid
d'une cauche</i>," that is to say, in the foot of a stocking. The
house was already sufficiently furnished with two oaken chests,
two beds, six chairs and a table, besides necessary household
utensils. Upon a shelf were some books, and in the corner a
trunk, by no means of a mysterious character, which had to
be opened for the inventory. This trunk was of drab leather,
ornamented with brass nails and little stars of white metal, and
it contained a bride's outfit, new and complete, of beautiful
Dunkirk linen—chemises and petticoats, and some silk dresses—with
a paper on which was written, in the handwriting of the
deceased,—</p>

<p>"For your wife: when you marry."</p>

<p>The loss of his mother was a terrible blow for the young man.
His disposition had always been unsociable; he became now
moody and sullen. The solitude around him was complete.
Hitherto it had been mere isolation; now his life was a blank.
While we have only one companion, life is endurable; left alone,
it seems as if it is impossible to struggle on, and we fall back in
the race, which is the first sign of despair. As time rolls on,
however, we discover that duty is a series of compromises; we
contemplate life, regard its end, and submit; but it is a submission
which makes the heart bleed.</p>

<p>Gilliatt was young; and his wound healed with time. At
that age sorrows cannot be lasting. His sadness, disappearing
by slow degrees, seemed to mingle itself with the scenes around
him, to draw him more and more towards the face of nature,
and further and further from the need of social converse; and,
finally, to assimilate his spirit more completely to the solitude
in which he lived.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>IV</h4>

<h5>AN UNPOPULAR MAN</h5>


<p>Gilliatt, as we have said, was not popular in the parish.
Nothing could be more natural than that antipathy among his
neighbours. The reasons for it were abundant. To begin with,
as we have already explained, there was the strange house he
lived in; then there was his mysterious origin. Who could that
woman have been? and what was the meaning of this child?
Country people do not like mysteries, when they relate to strange
sojourners among them. Then his clothes were the clothes of
a workman, while he had, although certainly not rich, sufficient
to live without labour. Then there was his garden, which he
succeeded in cultivating, and from which he produced crops of
potatoes, in spite of the stormy equinoxes; and then there were
the big books which he kept upon a shelf, and read from time to
time.</p>

<p>More reasons: why did he live that solitary life? The Bû de
la Rue was a kind of lazaretto, in which Gilliatt was kept in a
sort of moral quarantine. This, in the popular judgment, made
it quite simple that people should be astonished at his isolation,
and should hold him responsible for the solitude which society
had made around his home.</p>

<p>He never went to chapel. He often went out at night-time.
He held converse with sorcerers. He had been seen, on one
occasion, sitting on the grass with an expression of astonishment
on his features. He haunted the druidical stones of the Ancresse,
and the fairy caverns which are scattered about in that part.
It was generally believed that he had been seen politely saluting
the Roque qui Chante, or Crowing Rock. He bought all birds
which people brought to him, and having bought them, set them
at liberty. He was civil to the worthy folks in the streets of
St. Sampson, but willingly turned out of his way to avoid them
if he could. He often went out on fishing expeditions, and
always returned with fish. He trimmed his garden on Sundays.
He had a bagpipe which he had bought from one of the Highland
soldiers who are sometimes in Guernsey, and on which he played
occasionally at twilight, on the rocks by the seashore. He had
been seen to make strange gestures, like those of one sowing
seeds. What kind of treatment could be expected for a man
like that?</p>

<p>As regards the books left by the deceased woman, which he
was in the habit of reading, the neighbours were particularly
suspicious. The Reverend Jaquemin Hérode, rector of St.
Sampson, when he visited the house at the time of the woman's
funeral, had read on the backs of these books the titles <i>Rosier's
Dictionary</i>, <i>Candide</i>, by Voltaire, <i>Advice to the People on Health</i>,
by Tissot. A French noble, an émigré, who had retired to St.
Sampson, remarked that this Tissot, "must have been the
Tissot who carried the head of the Princess de Lamballe upon
a pike."</p>

<p>The Reverend gentleman had also remarked upon one of
these books, the highly fantastic and terribly significant title,
<i>De Rhubarbaro</i>.</p>

<p>In justice to Gilliatt, however, it must be added that this
volume being in Latin—a language which it is doubtful if he
understood—the young man had possibly never read it.</p>

<p>But it is just those books which a man possesses, but does
not read, which constitute the most suspicious evidence against
him. The Spanish Inquisition have deliberated on that point,
and have come to a conclusion which places the matter beyond
further doubt.</p>

<p>The book in question, however, was no other than the treatise
of Doctor Tilingius upon the rhubarb plant, published in
Germany in 1679.</p>

<p>It was by no means certain that Gilliatt did not prepare
philters and unholy decoctions. He was undoubtedly in
possession of certain phials.</p>

<p>Why did he walk abroad at evening, and sometimes even at
midnight, on the cliffs? Evidently to hold converse with the
evil spirits who, by night, frequent the seashores, enveloped
in smoke.</p>

<p>On one occasion he had aided a witch at Torteval to clean
her chaise: this was an old woman named Moutonne
Gahy.</p>

<p>When a census was taken in the island, in answer to a question
about his calling, he replied, "Fisherman; when there are fish
to catch." Imagine yourself in the place of Gilliatt's neighbours,
and admit that there is something unpleasant in
answers like this.</p>

<p>Poverty and wealth are comparative terms. Gilliatt had
some fields and a house, his own property; compared with those
who had nothing, he was not poor. One day, to test this, and
perhaps, also as a step towards a correspondence—for there are
base women who would marry a demon for the sake of riches—a
young girl of the neighbourhood said to Gilliatt, "When are
you going to take a wife, neighbour?" He answered, "I will
take a wife when the Roque qui Chante takes a husband."</p>

<p>This Roque qui Chante is a great stone, standing in a field
near Mons. Lemézurier de Fry's. It is a stone of a highly suspicious
character. No one knows what deeds are done around
it. At times you may hear there a cock crowing, when no cock
is near—an extremely disagreeable circumstance. Then it is
commonly asserted that this stone was originally placed in the
field by the elfin people known as <i>Sarregousets</i>, who are the same
as the <i>Sins</i>.</p>

<p>At night, when it thunders, if you should happen to see men
flying in the lurid light of the clouds, or on the rolling waves of
the air, these are no other than the Sarregousets. A woman
who lives at the Grand Mielles knows them well. One evening,
when some Sarregousets happened to be assembled at a crossroad,
this woman cried out to a man with a cart, who did not
know which route to take, "Ask them your way. They are
civil folks, and always ready to direct a stranger." There can
be little doubt that this woman was a sorceress.</p>

<p>The learned and judicious King James I. had women of this
kind boiled, and then tasting the water of the cauldron, was
able to say from its flavour, "That was a sorceress;" or "That
was not one."</p>

<p>It is to be regretted that the kings of these latter days no
longer possess a talent which placed in so strong a light the
utility of monarchical institutions.</p>

<p>It was not without substantial grounds that Gilliatt lived in
this odour of sorcery. One midnight, during a storm, Gilliatt
being at sea alone in a bark, on the coast by La Sommeilleuse,
he was heard to ask—</p>

<p>"Is there a passage sufficient for me?"</p>

<p>And a voice cried from the heights above:</p>

<p>"Passage enough: steer boldly."</p>

<p>To whom could he have been speaking, if not to those who
replied to him? This seems something like evidence.</p>

<p>Another time, one stormy evening, when it was so dark that
nothing could be distinguished, Gilliatt was near the Catiau
Roque—a double row of rocks where witches, goats, and other
diabolical creatures assemble and dance on Fridays—and here,
it is firmly believed, that the voice of Gilliatt was heard mingling
in the following terrible conversation:—</p>

<p>"How is Vesin Brovard?" (This was a mason who had
fallen from the roof of a house.)</p>

<p>"He is getting better."</p>

<p>"Ver dia! he fell from a greater height than that of yonder
peak. It is delightful to think that he was not dashed to
pieces."</p>

<p>"Our folks had a fine time for the seaweed gathering last
week."</p>

<p>"Ay, finer than to-day."</p>

<p>"I believe you. There will be little fish at the market to-day."</p>

<p>"It blows too hard."</p>

<p>"They can't lower their nets."</p>

<p>"How is Catherine?"</p>

<p>"She is charming."</p>

<p>Catherine was evidently the name of a Sarregouset.</p>

<p>According to all appearance, Gilliatt had business on hand at
night: at least none doubted it.</p>

<p>Sometimes he was seen with a pitcher in his hand, pouring
water on the ground. Now water, cast upon the ground, is
known to make a shape like that of devils.</p>

<p>On the road to St. Sampson, opposite the Martello tower,
number 1, stand three stones, arranged in the form of steps.
Upon the platform of those stones, now empty, stood anciently
a cross, or perhaps a gallows. These stones are full of evil
influences.</p>

<p>Staid and worthy people, and perfectly credible witnesses,
testified to having seen Gilliatt at this spot conversing with a
toad. Now there are no toads at Guernsey. The share of
Guernsey in the reptiles of the Channel Isles consisting exclusively
of the snakes. It is Jersey that has all the toads. This
toad, then, must have swum from the neighbouring island, in
order to hold converse with Gilliatt. The converse was of a
friendly kind.</p>

<p>These facts were clearly established; and the proof is that
the three stones are there to this day. Those who doubt it
may go and see them; and at a little distance, there is also a
house on which the passer-by may read this inscription:—</p>

<p>"<span class="smcap">Dealer in cattle, alive and dead, old cordage, iron,
bones, and tobacco for chewing, prompt payment for
goods, and every attention given to orders.</span>"</p>

<p>A man must be sceptical indeed to contest the existence of
those stones, and of the house in question. Now both these
circumstances were injurious to the reputation of Gilliatt.</p>

<p>Only the most ignorant are unaware of the fact that the
greatest danger of the coasts of the Channel Islands is the King
of the Auxcriniers. No inhabitant of the seas is more redoubtable.
Whoever has seen him is certain to be wrecked between
one St. Michel and the other. He is little, being in fact a
dwarf; and is deaf, in his quality of king. He knows the names
of all those who have been drowned in the seas, and the spots
where they lie. He has a profound knowledge of that great
graveyard which stretches far and wide beneath the waters of
the ocean. A head, massive in the lower part and narrow in
the forehead; a squat and corpulent figure; a skull, covered
with warty excrescences; long legs, long arms, fins for feet,
claws for hands, and a sea-green countenance; such are the
chief characteristics of this king of the waves. His claws have
palms like hands; his fins human nails. Imagine a spectral
fish with the face of a human being. No power could check his
career unless he could be exorcised, or mayhap, fished up from
the sea. Meanwhile he continues his sinister operations. Nothing
is more unpleasant than an interview with this monster:
amid the rolling waves and breakers, or in the thick of the mist,
the sailor perceives, sometimes, a strange creature with a beetle
brow, wide nostrils, flattened ears, an enormous mouth, gap-toothed
jaws, peaked eyebrows, and great grinning eyes. When
the lightning is livid, he appears red; when it is purple, he looks
wan. He has a stiff spreading beard, running with water, and
overlapping a sort of pelerine, ornamented with fourteen shells,
seven before and seven behind. These shells are curious to
those who are learned in conchology. The King of the Auxcriniers
is only seen in stormy seas. He is the terrible harbinger
of the tempest. His hideous form traces itself in the fog, in the
squall, in the tempest of rain. His breast is hideous. A coat
of scales covers his sides like a vest. He rises above the waves
which fly before the wind, twisting and curling like thin shavings
of wood beneath the carpenter's plane. Then his entire form
issues out of the foam, and if there should happen to be in the
horizon any vessels in distress, pale in the twilight, or his face
lighted up with a sinister smile, he dances terrible and uncouth
to behold. It is an evil omen indeed to meet him on a voyage.</p>

<p>At the period when the people of St. Sampson were particularly
excited on the subject of Gilliatt, the last persons who
had seen the King of the Auxcriniers declared that his pelerine
was now ornamented with only thirteen shells. Thirteen! He
was only the more dangerous. But what had become of the
fourteenth? Had he given it to some one? No one would say
positively; and folks confined themselves to conjecture. But
it was an undoubted fact that a certain Mons. Lupin Mabier,
of Godaines, a man of property, paying a good sum to the land
tax, was ready to depose on oath, that he had once seen in the
hands of Gilliatt a very remarkable kind of shell.</p>

<p>It was not uncommon to hear dialogues like the following
among the country people:—</p>

<p>"I have a fine bull here, neighbour, what do you say?"</p>

<p>"Very fine, neighbour?"</p>

<p>"It is a fact, tho' 'tis I who say it; he is better though for
tallow than for meat."</p>

<p>"Ver dia!"</p>

<p>"Are you sure that Gilliatt hasn't cast his eye upon it?"</p>

<p>Gilliatt would stop sometimes beside a field where some
labourers were assembled, or near gardens in which gardeners
were engaged, and would perhaps hear these mysterious words:</p>

<p>"When the <i>mors du diable</i> flourishes, reap the winter rye."</p>

<p>(The <i>mors du diable</i> is the scabwort plant.)</p>

<p>"The ash tree is coming out in leaf. There will be no more
frost."</p>

<p>"Summer solstice, thistle in flower."</p>

<p>"If it rain not in June, the wheat will turn white. Look out
for mildew."</p>

<p>"When the wild cherry appears, beware of the full moon."</p>

<p>"If the weather on the sixth day of the new moon is like
that of the fourth, or like that of the fifth day, it will be the
same nine times out of twelve, in the first case, and eleven
times out of twelve in the second, during the whole month."</p>

<p>"Keep your eye on neighbours who go to law with you.
Beware of malicious influences. A pig which has had warm
milk given to it will die. A cow which has had its teeth rubbed
with leeks will eat no more."</p>

<p>"Spawning time with the smelts; beware of fevers."</p>

<p>"When frogs begin to appear, sow your melons."</p>

<p>"When the liverwort flowers, sow your barley."</p>

<p>"When the limes are in bloom, mow the meadows."</p>

<p>"When the elm-tree flowers, open the hot-bed frames."</p>

<p>"When tobacco fields are in blossom, close your greenhouses."</p>

<p>And, fearful to relate, these occult precepts were not without
truth. Those who put faith in them could vouch for the fact.</p>

<p>One night, in the month of June, when Gilliatt was playing
upon his bagpipe, upon the sand-hills on the shore of the Demie
de Fontenelle, it had happened that the mackerel fishing had
failed.</p>

<p>One evening, at low water, it came to pass that a cart filled
with seaweed for manure overturned on the beach, in front of
Gilliatt's house. It is most probable that he was afraid of
being brought before the magistrates, for he took considerable
trouble in helping to raise the cart, and he filled it again
himself.</p>

<p>A little neglected child of the neighbourhood being troubled
with vermin, he had gone himself to St. Peter's Port, and had
returned with an ointment, with which he rubbed the child's
head. Thus Gilliatt had removed the pest from the poor
child, which was an evidence that Gilliatt himself had originally
given it; for everybody knows that there is a certain charm for
giving vermin to people.</p>

<p>Gilliatt was suspected of looking into wells—a dangerous
practice with those who have an evil eye; and, in fact, at
Arculons, near St. Peter's Port, the water of a well became
unwholesome. The good woman to whom this well belonged
said to Gilliatt:</p>

<p>"Look here, at this water;" and she showed him a glassful.
Gilliatt acknowledged it.</p>

<p>"The water is thick," he said; "that is true."</p>

<p>The good woman, who dreaded him in her heart, said, "Make
it sweet again for me."</p>

<p>Gilliatt asked her some questions: whether she had a stable?
whether the stable had a drain? whether the gutter of the
drain did not pass near the well? The good woman replied
"Yes." Gilliatt went into the stable; worked at the drain;
turned the gutter in another direction; and the water became
pure again. People in the country round might think what they
pleased. A well does not become foul one moment and sweet
the next without good cause; the bottom of the affair was
involved in obscurity; and, in short, it was difficult to escape
the conclusion that Gilliatt himself had bewitched the water.</p>

<p>On one occasion, when he went to Jersey, it was remarked
that he had taken a lodging in the street called the Rue des
Alleurs. Now the word <i>alleurs</i> signifies spirits from the other
world.</p>

<p>In villages it is the custom to gather together all these little
hints and indications of a man's career; and when they are
gathered together, the total constitutes his reputation among
the inhabitants.</p>

<p>It happened that Gilliatt was once caught with blood issuing
from his nose. The circumstances appeared grave. The
master of a barque who had sailed almost entirely round the
world, affirmed that among the Tongusians all sorcerers were
subject to bleeding at the nose. In fact, when you see a man
in those parts bleeding at the nose, you know at once what is
in the wind. Moderate reasoners, however, remarked that the
characteristics of sorcerers among the Tongusians may possibly
not apply in the same degree to the sorcerers of Guernsey.</p>

<p>In the environs of one of the St. Michels, he had been seen
to stop in a close belonging to the Huriaux, skirting the highway
from the Videclins. He whistled in the field, and a moment
afterwards a crow alighted there; a moment later, a magpie.
The fact was attested by a worthy man who has since been
appointed to the office of Douzenier of the Douzaine, as those
are called who are authorised to make a new survey and register
of the fief of the king.</p>

<p>At Hamel, in the Vingtaine of L'Epine, there lived some old
women who were positive of having heard one morning a
number of swallows distinctly calling "Gilliatt."</p>

<p>Add to all this that he was of a malicious temper.</p>

<p>One day, a poor man was beating an ass. The ass was
obstinate. The poor man gave him a few kicks in the belly
with his wooden shoe, and the ass fell. Gilliatt ran to raise
the unlucky beast, but he was dead. Upon this Gilliatt administered
to the poor man a sound thrashing.</p>

<p>Another day, Gilliatt seeing a boy come down from a tree
with a brood of little birds, newly hatched and unfledged, he
took the brood away from the boy, and carried his malevolence
so far as even to take them back and replace them in the tree.</p>

<p>Some passers-by took up the boy's complaint; but Gilliatt
made no reply, except to point to the old birds, who were
hovering and crying plaintively over the tree, as they looked
for their nest. He had a weakness for birds—another sign by
which the people recognise a magician.</p>

<p>Children take a pleasure in robbing the nests of birds along
the cliff. They bring home quantities of yellow, blue, and
green eggs, with which they make rosaries for mantelpiece
ornaments. As the cliffs are peaked, they sometimes slip and
are killed. Nothing is prettier than shutters decorated with
sea-birds' eggs. Gilliatt's mischievous ingenuity had no end.
He would climb, at the peril of his own life, into the steep
places of the sea rocks, and hang up bundles of hay, old hats,
and all kinds of scarecrows, to deter the birds from building
there, and, as a consequence, to prevent the children from
visiting those spots.</p>

<p>These are some of the reasons why Gilliatt was disliked
throughout the country. Perhaps nothing less could have
been expected.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>V</h4>

<h5>MORE SUSPICIOUS FACTS ABOUT GILLIATT</h5>


<p>Public opinion was not yet quite settled with regard to Gilliatt.</p>

<p>In general he was regarded as a <i>Marcou</i>: some went so far
as to believe him to be a <i>Cambion</i>. A cambion is the child of
a woman begotten by a devil.</p>

<p>When a woman bears to her husband seven male children
consecutively, the seventh is a marcou. But the series must
not be broken by the birth of any female child.</p>

<p>The marcou has a natural fleur-de-lys imprinted upon some
part of his body; for which reason he has the power of curing
scrofula, exactly the same as the King of France. Marcous
are found in all parts of France, but particularly in the Orléanais.
Every village of Gâtinais has its marcou. It is sufficient
for the cure of the sick that the marcou should breathe upon
their wounds, or let them touch his fleur-de-lys. The night of
Good Friday is particularly favourable to these ceremonies.
Ten years ago there lived, at Ormes in Gâtinais, one of these
creatures who was nicknamed the Beau Marcou, and consulted
by all the country of Beauce. He was a cooper, named Foulon,
who kept a horse and vehicle. To put a stop to his miracles,
it was found necessary to call in the assistance of the gendarmes.
His fleur-de-lys was on the left breast; other marcous have it
in different parts.</p>

<p>There are marcous at Jersey, Auvigny, and at Guernsey.
This fact is doubtless in some way connected with the rights
possessed by France over Normandy: or why the fleur-de-lys?</p>

<p>There are also, in the Channel Islands, people afflicted with
scrofula; which of course necessitates a due supply of these
marcous.</p>

<p>Some people, who happened to be present one day when
Gilliatt was bathing in the sea, had fancied that they could
perceive upon him a fleur-de-lys. Interrogated on that subject
he made no reply, but merely burst into laughter. For he
laughed sometimes like other men. From that time, however,
no one ever saw him bathe: he bathed thenceforth only in
perilous and solitary places; probably by moonlight: a thing
in itself somewhat suspicious.</p>

<p>Those who obstinately regarded him as a cambion, or son of
the devil, were evidently in error. They ought to have known
that cambions scarcely exist out of Germany. But The Vale
and St. Sampson were, fifty years ago, places remarkable for the
ignorance of their inhabitants.</p>

<p>To fancy that a resident of the island of Guernsey could be
the son of a devil was evidently absurd.</p>

<p>Gilliatt, for the very reason that he caused disquietude among
the people, was sought for and consulted. The peasants came
in fear, to talk to him of their diseases. That fear itself had in it
something of faith in his powers; for in the country, the more
the doctor is suspected of magic, the more certain is the cure.
Gilliatt had certain remedies of his own, which he had inherited
from the deceased woman. He communicated them to all who
had need of them, and would never receive money for them.
He cured whitlows with applications of herbs. A liquor in one
of his phials allayed fever. The chemist of St. Sampson, or
<i>pharmacien</i>, as they would call him in France, thought that this
was probably a decoction of Jesuits' bark. The more generous
among his censors admitted that Gilliatt was not so bad a
demon in his dealings with the sick, so far as regarded his
ordinary remedies. But in his character of a marcou, he would
do nothing. If persons afflicted with scrofula came to him to
ask to touch the fleur-de-lys on his skin, he made no other answer
than that of shutting the door in their faces. He persistently
refused to perform any miracles—a ridiculous position for a
sorcerer. No one is bound to be a sorcerer; but when a man is
one, he ought not to shirk the duties of his position.</p>

<p>One or two exceptions might be found to this almost universal
antipathy. Sieur Landoys, of the Clos-Landés, was clerk and
registrar of St. Peter's Port, custodian of the documents,
and keeper of the register of births, marriages, and deaths.
This Landoys was vain of his descent from Peter Landoys,
treasurer of the province of Brittany, who was hanged in
1485. One day, when Sieur Landoys was bathing in the sea,
he ventured to swim out too far, and was on the point of drowning:
Gilliatt plunged into the water, narrowly escaping drowning
himself, and succeeded in saving him. From that day
Landoys never spoke an evil word of Gilliatt. To those who
expressed surprise at this change, he replied, "Why should I
detest a man who never did me any harm, and who has rendered
me a service?" The parish clerk and registrar even came at
last to feel a sort of friendship for Gilliatt. This public functionary
was a man without prejudices. He had no faith in
sorcerers. He laughed at people who went in fear of ghostly
visitors. As for him, he had a boat in which he amused himself
by making fishing excursions in his leisure hours; but he had
never seen anything extraordinary, unless it was on one occasion
—a woman clothed in white, who rose about the waters in the
light of the moon—and even of this circumstance he was not
quite sure. Moutonne Gahy, the old witch of Torteval, had given
him a little bag to be worn under the cravat, as a protection
against evil spirits: he ridiculed the bag, and knew not what it
contained, though, to be sure, he carried it about him, feeling
more security with this charm hanging on his neck.</p>

<p>Some courageous persons, emboldened by the example of
Landoys, ventured to cite, in Gilliatt's favour, certain extenuating
circumstances; a few signs of good qualities, as his sobriety,
his abstinence from spirits and tobacco; and sometimes they
went so far as to pass this elegant eulogium upon him: "He
neither smokes, drinks, chews tobacco, or takes snuff."</p>

<p>Sobriety, however, can only count as a virtue when there are
other virtues to support it.</p>

<p>The ban of public opinion lay heavily upon Gilliatt.</p>

<p>In any case, as a marcou, Gilliatt had it in his power to render
great services. On a certain Good Friday, at midnight, a day
and an hour propitious to this kind of cure, all the scrofulous
people of the island, either by sudden inspiration, or by concerted
action, presented themselves in a crowd at the Bû de la
Rue, and with pitiable sores and imploring gestures, called on
Gilliatt to make them clean. But he refused; and herein the
people found another proof of his malevolence.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VI</h4>

<h5>THE DUTCH SLOOP</h5>


<p>Such was the character of Gilliatt.</p>

<p>The young women considered him ugly.</p>

<p>Ugly he was not. He might, perhaps, have been called
handsome. There was something in his profile of rude but
antique grace. In repose it had some resemblance to that of
a sculptured Dacian on the Trajan column. His ears were
small, delicate, without lobes, and of an admirable form for
hearing. Between his eyes he had that proud vertical line
which indicates in a man boldness and perseverance. The
corners of his mouth were depressed, giving a slight expression
of bitterness. His forehead had a calm and noble roundness.
The clear pupils of his eyes possessed a steadfast look, although
troubled a little with that involuntary movement of the eyelids
which fishermen contract from the glitter of the waves.
His laugh was boyish and pleasing. No ivory could be of a
finer white than his teeth; but exposure to the sun had made
him swarthy as a moor. The ocean, the tempest, and the darkness
cannot be braved with impunity. At thirty he looked
already like a man of forty-five. He wore the sombre mask of
the wind and the sea.</p>

<p>The people had nicknamed him "Malicious Gilliatt."</p>

<p>There is an Indian fable to the effect that one day the god
Brahma inquired of the Spirit of Power, "Who is stronger than
thee?" and the spirit replied "Cunning." A Chinese proverb
says, "What could not the lion do, if he was the monkey also?"
Gilliatt was neither the lion nor the monkey; but his actions
gave some evidence of the truth of the Chinese proverb, and
of the Hindoo fable. Although only of ordinary height and
strength, he was enabled, so inventive and powerful was his
dexterity, to lift burdens that might have taxed a giant, and to
accomplish feats which would have done credit to an athlete.</p>

<p>He had in him something of the power of the gymnast. He
used, with equal address, his left hand and his right.</p>

<p>He never carried a gun; but was often seen with his net. He
spared the birds, but not the fish. Ill-luck to these dumb
creatures! He was an excellent swimmer.</p>

<p>Solitude either develops the mental powers, or renders men
dull and vicious. Gilliatt sometimes presented himself under
both these aspects. At times, when his features wore that air
of strange surprise already mentioned, he might have been
taken for a man of mental powers scarcely superior to the savage.
At other moments an indescribable air of penetration lighted
up his face. Ancient Chaldea possessed some men of this stamp.
At certain times the dullness of the shepherd mind became
transparent, and revealed the inspired sage.</p>

<p>After all, he was but a poor man; uninstructed, save to the
extent of reading and writing. It is probable that the condition
of his mind was at that limit which separates the dreamer
from the thinker. The thinker wills, the dreamer is a passive
instrument. Solitude sinks deeply into pure natures, and
modifies them in a certain degree. They become, unconsciously,
penetrated with a kind of sacred awe. The shadow in which
the mind of Gilliatt constantly dwelt was composed in almost
equal degrees of two elements, both obscure, but very different.
Within himself all was ignorance and weakness; without,
infinity and mysterious power.</p>

<p>By dint of frequent climbing on the rocks, of escalading the
rugged cliffs, of going to and fro among the islands in all
weathers, of navigating any sort of craft which came to hand,
of venturing night and day in difficult channels, he had become,
without taking count of his other advantages, and merely in
following his fancy and pleasure, a seaman of extraordinary
skill.</p>

<p>He was a born pilot. The true pilot is the man who navigates
the bed of the ocean even more than its surface. The waves
of the sea are an external problem, continually modified by the
submarine conditions of the waters in which the vessel is making
her way. To see Gilliatt guiding his craft among the reefs and
shallows of the Norman Archipelago, one might have fancied that
he carried in his head a plan of the bottom of the sea. He was
familiar with it all, and feared nothing.</p>

<p>He was better acquainted with the buoys in the channels
than the cormorants who make them their resting-places. The
almost imperceptible differences which distinguish the four
upright buoys of the Creux, Alligande, the Trémies, and the
Sardrette, were perfectly visible and clear to him, even in misty
weather. He hesitated neither at the oval, apple-headed buoy
of Anfré, nor at the triple iron point of the Rousse, nor at the
white ball of the Corbette, nor at the black ball of Longue Pierre;
and there was no fear of his confounding the cross of Goubeau
with the sword planted in earth at La Platte, nor the hammer-shaped
buoy of the Barbées with the curled-tail buoy of the
Moulinet.</p>

<p>His rare skill in seamanship showed itself in a striking manner
one day at Guernsey, on the occasion of one of those sea tournaments
which are called regattas. The feat to be performed was
to navigate alone a boat with four sails from St. Sampson to the
Isle of Herm, at one league distance, and to bring the boat back
from Herm to St. Sampson. To manage, without assistance, a
boat with four sails, is a feat which every fisherman is equal to,
and the difficulty seemed little; but there was a condition
which rendered it far from simple. The boat, to begin with,
was one of those large and heavy sloops of bygone times which
the sailors of the last century knew by the name of "Dutch
Belly Boats." This ancient style of flat, pot-bellied craft,
carrying on the larboard and starboard sides, in compensation
for the want of a keel, two wings, which lowered themselves,
sometimes the one, sometimes the other, according to the wind,
may occasionally be met with still at sea. In the second place,
there was the return from Herm, a journey which was rendered
more difficult by a heavy ballasting of stones. The conditions
were to go empty, but to return loaded. The sloop was the prize
of the contest. It was dedicated beforehand to the winner.
This "Dutch Belly Boat" had been employed as a pilot-boat.
The pilot who had rigged and worked it for twenty years was
the most robust of all the sailors of the channel. When he died
no one had been found capable of managing the sloop; and it
was, in consequence, determined to make it the prize of the
regatta. The sloop, though not decked, had some sea qualities,
and was a tempting prize for a skilful sailor. Her mast was
somewhat forward, which increased the motive-power of her
sails; besides having the advantage of not being in the way of
her pilot. It was a strong-built vessel, heavy, but roomy, and
taking the open sea well; in fact, a good, serviceable craft.
There was eager anxiety for the prize; the task was a rough one,
but the reward of success was worth having. Seven or eight
fishermen, among the most vigorous of the island, presented
themselves. One by one they essayed; but not one could
succeed in reaching Herm. The last one who tried his skill was
known for having crossed, in a rowing-boat, the terrible narrow
sea between Sark and Brecq-Hou. Sweating with his exertions,
he brought back the sloop, and said, "It is impossible."
Gilliatt then entered the bark, seized first of all the oar, then the
mainsail, and pushed out to sea. Then, without either making
fast the boom, which would have been imprudent, or letting it
go, which kept the sail under his direction, and leaving the boom
to move with the wind without drifting, he held the tiller with
his left hand. In three quarters of an hour he was at Herm.
Three hours later, although a strong breeze had sprung up and
was blowing across the roads, the sloop, guided by Gilliatt,
returned to St. Sampson with its load of stones. He had, with
an extravagant display of his resources, even added to the cargo
the little bronze cannon at Herm, which the people were in the
habit of firing off on the 5th of November, by way of rejoicing
over the death of Guy Fawkes.</p>

<p>Guy Fawkes, by the way, has been dead two hundred and
sixty years; a remarkably long period of rejoicing.</p>

<p>Gilliatt, thus burdened and encumbered, although he had the
Guy Fawkes'-day cannon in the boat and the south wind in his
sails, steered, or rather brought back, the heavy craft to St.
Sampson.</p>

<p>Seeing which, Mess Lethierry exclaimed, "There's a bold
sailor for you!"</p>

<p>And he held out his hand to Gilliatt.</p>

<p>We shall have occasion to speak again of Mess Lethierry.</p>

<p>The sloop was awarded to Gilliatt.</p>

<p>This adventure detracted nothing from his evil reputation.</p>

<p>Several persons declared that the feat was not at all astonishing,
for that Gilliatt had concealed in the boat a branch of wild
medlar. But this could not be proved.</p>

<p>From that day forward, Gilliatt navigated no boat except
the old sloop. In this heavy craft he went on his fishing avocation.
He kept it at anchor in the excellent little shelter which
he had all to himself, under the very wall of his house of the
Bû de la Rue. At nightfall, he cast his nets over his shoulder,
traversed his little garden, climbed over the parapet of dry
stones, stepped lightly from rock to rock, and jumping into the
sloop, pushed out to sea.</p>

<p>He brought home heavy takes of fish; but people said that
his medlar branch was always hanging up in the boat. No one
had ever seen this branch, but every one believed in its existence.</p>

<p>When he had more fish than he wanted, he did not sell it, but
gave it away.</p>

<p>The poor people took his gift, but were little grateful, for
they knew the secret of his medlar branch. Such devices cannot
be permitted. It is unlawful to trick the sea out of its treasures.</p>

<p>He was a fisherman; but he was something more. He had,
by instinct, or for amusement, acquired a knowledge of three
or four trades. He was a carpenter, worker in iron, wheelwright,
boat-caulker, and, to some extent, an engineer. No one could
mend a broken wheel better than he could. He manufactured,
in a fashion of his own, all the things which fishermen use. In
a corner of the Bû de la Rue he had a small forge and an anvil;
and the sloop having but one anchor, he had succeeded, without
help, in making another. The anchor was excellent. The ring
had the necessary strength; and Gilliatt, though entirely uninstructed
in this branch of the smith's art, had found the exact
dimensions of the stock for preventing the over-balancing of the
fluke ends.</p>

<p>He had patiently replaced all the nails in the planks by rivets;
which rendered rust in the holes impossible.</p>

<p>In this way he had much improved the sea-going qualities of
the sloop. He employed it sometimes when he took a fancy
to spend a month or two in some solitary islet, like Chousey or
the Casquets. People said, "Ay! ay! Gilliatt is away;" but
this was a circumstance which nobody regretted.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VII</h4>

<h5>A FIT TENANT FOR A HAUNTED HOUSE</h5>


<p>Gilliatt was a man of dreams, hence his daring, hence also his
timidity. He had ideas on many things which were peculiarly
his own.</p>

<p>There was in his character, perhaps, something of the visionary
and the transcendentalist. Hallucinations may haunt the poor
peasant like Martin, no less than the king like Henry IV. There
are times when the unknown reveals itself in a mysterious way
to the spirit of man. A sudden rent in the veil of darkness will
make manifest things hitherto unseen, and then close again
upon the mysteries within. Such visions have occasionally the
power to effect a transfiguration in those whom they visit.
They convert a poor camel-driver into a Mahomet; a peasant
girl tending her goats into a Joan of Arc. Solitude generates a
certain amount of sublime exaltation. It is like the smoke
arising from the burning bush. A mysterious lucidity of mind
results, which converts the student into a seer, and the poet
into a prophet: herein we find a key to the mysteries of Horeb,
Kedron, Ombos; to the intoxication of Castilian laurels, the
revelations of the month Busion. Hence, too, we have Peleia
at Dodona, Phemonoe at Delphos, Trophonius in Lebadea,
Ezekiel on the Chebar, and Jerome in the Thetais.</p>

<p>More frequently this visionary state overwhelms and stupefies
its victim. There is such a thing as a divine besottedness. The
Hindoo fakir bears about with him the burden of his vision,
as the Cretin his goître. Luther holding converse with devils
in his garret at Wittenburg; Pascal shutting out the view of
the infernal regions with the screen of his cabinet; the African
Obi conversing with the white-faced god Bossum; are each and
all the same phenomenon, diversely interpreted by the minds
in which they manifest themselves, according to their capacity
and power. Luther and Pascal were grand, and are grand
still; the Obi is simply a poor half-witted creature.</p>

<p>Gilliatt was neither so exalted nor so low. He was a dreamer:
nothing more.</p>

<p>Nature presented itself to him under a somewhat strange
aspect.</p>

<p>Just as he had often found in the perfectly limpid water of
the sea strange creatures of considerable size and of various
shapes, of the Medusa genus, which out of the water bore a
resemblance to soft crystal, and which, cast again into the
sea, became lost to sight in that medium by reason of their
identity in transparency and colour, so he imagined that other
transparencies, similar to these almost invisible denizens of
the ocean, might probably inhabit the air around us. The
birds are scarcely inhabitants of the air, but rather amphibious
creatures passing much of their lives upon the earth. Gilliatt
could not believe the air a mere desert. He used to say,
"Since the water is filled with life, why not the atmosphere?"
Creatures colourless and transparent like the air would escape
from our observation. What proof have we that there are
no such creatures? Analogy indicates that the liquid fields
of air must have their swimming habitants, even as the waters
of the deep. These aerial fish would, of course, be diaphanous;
a provision of their wise Creator for our sakes as well as their
own. Allowing the light to pass through their forms, casting
no shadow, having no defined outline, they would necessarily
remain unknown to us, and beyond the grasp of human sense.
Gilliatt indulged the wild fancy that if it were possible to
exhaust the earth of its atmosphere, or if we could fish the air
as we fish the depths of the sea, we should discover the existence
of a multitude of strange animals. And then, he would add in
his reverie, many things would be made clear.</p>

<p>Reverie, which is thought in its nebulous state, borders
closely upon the land of sleep, by which it is bounded as by a
natural frontier. The discovery of a new world, in the form
of an atmosphere filled with transparent creatures, would be
the beginning of a knowledge of the vast unknown. But beyond
opens up the illimitable domain of the possible, teeming with
yet other beings, and characterised by other phenomena. All
this would be nothing supernatural, but merely the occult continuation
of the infinite variety of creation. In the midst of
that laborious idleness, which was the chief feature in his existence,
Gilliatt was singularly observant. He even carried his
observations into the domain of sleep. Sleep has a close
relation with the possible, which we call also the <i>invraisemblable</i>.
The world of sleep has an existence of its own. Night-time,
regarded as a separate sphere of creation, is a universe in itself.
The material nature of man, upon which philosophers tell us
that a column of air forty-five miles in height continually presses,
is wearied out at night, sinks into lassitude, lies down, and finds
repose. The eyes of the flesh are closed; but in that drooping
head, less inactive than is supposed, other eyes are opened.
The unknown reveals itself. The shadowy existences of the
invisible world become more akin to man; whether it be that
there is a real communication, or whether things far off in the
unfathomable abyss are mysteriously brought nearer, it seems
as if the impalpable creatures inhabiting space come then to
contemplate our natures, curious to comprehend the denizens
of the earth. Some phantom creation ascends or descends to
walk beside us in the dim twilight: some existence altogether
different from our own, composed partly of human consciousness,
partly of something else, quits his fellows and returns again,
after presenting himself for a moment to our inward sight; and
the sleeper, not wholly slumbering, nor yet entirely conscious,
beholds around him strange manifestations of life—pale spectres,
terrible or smiling, dismal phantoms, uncouth masks, unknown
faces, hydra-headed monsters, undefined shapes, reflections of
moonlight where there is no moon, vague fragments of monstrous
forms. All these things which come and go in the troubled
atmosphere of sleep, and to which men give the name of
dreams, are, in truth, only realities invisible to those who walk
about the daylight world. The dream-world is the Aquarium
of Night.</p>

<p>So, at least, thought Gilliatt.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VIII</h4>

<h5>THE GILD-HOLM-'UR SEAT</h5>


<p>The curious visitor, in these days, would seek in vain in the
little bay of Houmet for the house in which Gilliatt lived, or
for his garden, or the creek in which he sheltered the Dutch
sloop. The Bû de la Rue no longer exists. Even the little
peninsula on which his house stood has vanished, levelled by
the pickaxe of the quarryman, and carried away, cart-load by
cart-load, by dealers in rock and granite. It must be sought
now in the churches, the palaces, and the quays of a great
city. All that ridge of rocks has been long ago conveyed to
London.</p>

<p>These long lines of broken cliffs in the sea, with their frequent
gaps and crevices, are like miniature chains of mountains. They
strike the eye with the impression which a giant may be supposed
to have in contemplating the Cordilleras. In the language of
the country they are called "Banques." These banques vary
considerably in form. Some resemble a long spine, of which
each rock forms one of the vertebræ; others are like the backbone
of a fish; while some bear an odd resemblance to a crocodile
in the act of drinking.</p>

<p>At the extremity of the ridge on which the Bû de la Rue was
situate, was a large rock, which the fishing people of Houmet
called the "Beast's Horn." This rock, a sort of pyramid,
resembled, though less in height, the "Pinnacle" of Jersey.
At high water the sea divided it from the ridge, and the Horn
stood alone; at low water it was approached by an isthmus of
rocks. The remarkable feature of this "Beast's Horn" was a
sort of natural seat on the side next the sea, hollowed out by
the water, and polished by the rains. The seat, however, was
a treacherous one. The stranger was insensibly attracted to
it by "the beauty of the prospect," as the Guernsey folks said.
Something detained him there in spite of himself, for there is
a charm in a wide view. The seat seemed to offer itself for his
convenience; it formed a sort of niche in the peaked <i>façade</i> of
the rock. To climb up to it was easy, for the sea, which had
fashioned it out of its rocky base, had also cast beneath it, at
convenient distances, a kind of natural stairs composed of flat
stones. The perilous abyss is full of these snares; beware,
therefore, of its proffered aids. The spot was tempting: the
stranger mounted and sat down. There he found himself at
his ease; for his seat he had the granite rounded and hollowed
out by the foam; for supports, two rocky elbows which seemed
made expressly for him; against his back, the high vertical wall
of rock which he looked up to and admired, without thinking of
the impossibility of scaling it. Nothing could be more simple
than to fall into reverie in that convenient resting-place. All
around spread the wide sea; far off the ships were seen passing
to and fro. It was possible to follow a sail with the eye, till
it sank in the horizon beyond the Casquets. The stranger was
entranced: he looked around, enjoying the beauty of the scene,
and the light touch of wind and wave. There is a sort of bat
found at Cayenne, which has the power of fanning people to
sleep in the shade with a gentle beating of its dusky wings.
Like this strange creature the wind wanders about, alternately
ravaging or lulling into security. So the stranger would
continue contemplating the sea, listening for a movement in
the air, and yielding himself up to dreamy indolence. When
the eyes are satiated with light and beauty, it is a luxury to
close them for awhile. Suddenly the loiterer would arouse;
but it was too late. The sea had crept up step by step; the
waters surrounded the rock; the stranger had been lured on
to his death.</p>

<p>A terrible rock was this in a rising sea.</p>

<p>The tide gathers at first insensibly, then with violence; when
it touches the rocks a sudden wrath seems to possess it, and
it foams. Swimming is difficult in the breakers: excellent
swimmers have been lost at the Horn of the Bû de la Rue.</p>

<p>In certain places, and at certain periods, the aspect of the
sea is dangerous—fatal; as at times is the glance of a woman.</p>

<p>Very old inhabitants of Guernsey used to call this niche,
fashioned in the rock by the waves, "Gild-Holm-'Ur" seat, or
Kidormur; a Celtic word, say some authorities, which those who
understand Celtic cannot interpret, and which all who understand
French can—"<i>Qui-dort-meurt:</i>"<a name="FNanchor_1_1" id="FNanchor_1_1"></a><a href="#Footnote_1_1" class="fnanchor">[1]</a> such is the country
folks' translation.</p>

<p>The reader may choose between the translation, <i>Qui-dort-meurt</i>,
and that given in 1819, I believe in <i>The Armorican</i>, by
M. Athenas. According to this learned Celtic scholar, Gild-Holm-'Ur
signifies "The resting-place of birds."</p>

<p>There is, at Aurigny, another seat of this kind, called the
Monk's Chair, so well sculptured by the waves, and with steps
of rock so conveniently placed, that it might be said that the
sea politely sets a footstool for those who rest there.</p>

<p>In the open sea, at high water, the Gild-Holm-'Ur was no
longer visible; the water covered it entirely.</p>

<p>The Gild-Holm-'Ur was a neighbour of the Bû de la Rue.
Gilliatt knew it well, and often seated himself there. Was it
his meditating place? No. We have already said he did not
meditate, but dream. The sea, however, never entrapped him
there.</p>
<p></p>
<div class="footnotes"><h3>FOOTNOTES:</h3>

<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_1_1" id="Footnote_1_1"></a><a href="#FNanchor_1_1"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> He who sleeps must die.</p></div>
</div>
