<h4>I</h4>

<h5>EXTREMES MEET</h5>


<p>Nothing is more threatening than a late equinox.</p>

<p>The appearance of the sea presents a strange phenomenon,
resulting from what may be called the arrival of the ocean
winds.</p>

<p>In all seasons, but particularly at the epoch of the Syzygies,
at the moment when least expected, the sea sometimes becomes
singularly tranquil. That vast perpetual movement ceases; a
sort of drowsiness and languor overspreads it; and it seems
weary and about to rest. Every rag of bunting, from the tiny
streamer of the fishing-boat to the great flag of ships of war,
droops against the mast. The admiral's flag, the Royal and
Imperial ensigns sleep alike.</p>

<p>Suddenly all these streamers begin to flutter gently.</p>

<p>If there happen to be clouds, the moment has then come for
marking the formation of the <i>cirri</i>; if the sun is setting, for
observing the red tints of the horizon; or if it be night and
there is a moon, for looking attentively for the halo.</p>

<p>It is then that the captain or commander of a squadron, if he
happen to possess one of those storm indicators, the inventor of
which is unknown, notes his instrument carefully and takes his
precautions against the south wind, if the clouds have an
appearance like dissolved sugar; or against the north, if they
exfoliate in crystallisations like brakes of brambles, or like fir
woods. Then, too, the poor Irish or Breton fisherman, after
having consulted some mysterious gnomon engraved by the
Romans or by demons upon one of those straight enigmatical
stones, which are called in Brittany <i>Menhir</i>, and in Ireland
<i>Cruach</i>, hauls his boat up on the shore.</p>

<p>Meanwhile the serenity of sky and ocean continues. The
day dawns radiant, and Aurora smiles. It was this which filled
the old poets and seers with religious horror; for men dared to
suspect the falsity of the sun. <i>Solem quis dicere falsum audeat?</i></p>

<p>The sombre vision of nature's secret laws is interdicted to
man by the fatal opacity of surrounding things. The most
terrible and perfidious of her aspects is that which masks the
convulsions of the deep.</p>

<p>Some hours, and even days sometimes, pass thus. Pilots
raise their telescopes here and there. The faces of old seamen
have always an expression of severity left upon them by the
vexation of perpetually looking out for changes.</p>

<p>Suddenly a great confused murmur is heard. A sort of
mysterious dialogue takes place in the air.</p>

<p>Nothing unusual is seen.</p>

<p>The wide expanse is tranquil.</p>

<p>Yet the noises increase. The dialogue becomes more audible.</p>

<p>There is something beyond the horizon.</p>

<p>Something terrible. It is the wind.</p>

<p>The wind; or rather that populace of Titans which we call
the gale. The unseen multitude.</p>

<p>India knew them as the Maroubs, Judea as the Keroubim,
Greece as the Aquilones. They are the invisible winged
creatures of the Infinite. Their blasts sweep over the earth.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>II</h4>

<h5>THE OCEAN WINDS</h5>


<p>They come from the immeasurable deep. Their wide wings
need the breadth of the ocean gulf; the spaciousness of desert
solitudes. The Atlantic, the Pacific—those vast blue plains—are
their delight. They hasten thither in flocks. Commander
Page witnessed, far out at sea, seven waterspouts at once.
They wander there, wild and terrible! The ever-ending yet
eternal flux and reflux is their work. The extent of their
power, the limits of their will, none know. They are the
Sphinxes of the abyss: Gama was their [OE]dipus. In that dark,
ever-moving expanse, they appear with faces of cloud. He
who perceives their pale lineaments in that wide dispersion, the
horizon of the sea, feels himself in presence of an unsubduable
power. It might be imagined that the proximity of human intelligence
disquieted them, and that they revolted against it.
The mind of man is invincible, but the elements baffle him. He
can do nothing against the power which is everywhere, and
which none can bind. The gentle breath becomes a gale, smites
with the force of a war-club, and then becomes gentle again.
The winds attack with a terrible crash, and defend themselves
by fading into nothingness. He who would encounter them
must use artifice. Their varying tactics, their swift redoubled
blows, confuse. They fly as often as they attack. They are
tenacious and impalpable. Who can circumvent them? The
prow of the <i>Argo</i>, cut from an oak of Dodona's grove, that
mysterious pilot of the bark, spoke to them, and they insulted
that pilot-goddess. Columbus, beholding their approach at <i>La
Pinta</i>, mounted upon the poop, and addressed them with the
first verses of St. John's Gospel. Surcouf defied them: "Here
come the gang," he used to say. Napier greeted them with
cannon-balls. They assume the dictatorship of chaos.</p>

<p>Chaos is theirs, in which to wreak their mysterious vengeance:
the den of the winds is more monstrous than that of lions.
How many corpses lie in its deep recesses, where the howling
gusts sweep without pity over that obscure and ghastly mass!
The winds are heard wheresoever they go, but they give ear to
none. Their acts resemble crimes. None know on whom they
cast their hoary surf; with what ferocity they hover over shipwrecks,
looking at times as if they flung their impious foam-flakes
in the face of heaven. They are the tyrants of unknown
regions. "<i>Luoghi spaventosi</i>," murmured the Venetian
mariners.</p>

<p>The trembling fields of space are subjected to their fierce
assaults. Things unspeakable come to pass in those deserted
regions. Some horseman rides in the gloom; the air is full of a
forest sound; nothing is visible; but the tramp of cavalcades is
heard. The noonday is overcast with sudden night; a tornado
passes. Or it is midnight, which suddenly becomes bright as
day; the polar lights are in the heavens. Whirlwinds pass in
opposite ways, and in a sort of hideous dance, a stamping of the
storms upon the waters. A cloud overburdened opens and
falls to earth. Other clouds, filled with red light, flash and
roar; then frown again ominously. Emptied of their lightnings,
they are but as spent brands. Pent-up rains dissolve in
mists. Yonder sea appears a fiery furnace in which the rains are
falling: flames seem to issue from the waves. The white gleam
of the ocean under the shower is reflected to marvellous distances.
The different masses transform themselves into uncouth
shapes. Monstrous whirlpools make strange hollows in
the sky. The vapours revolve, the waves spin, the giddy
Naiads roll; sea and sky are livid; noises as of cries of despair
are in the air.</p>

<p>Great sheaves of shadow and darkness are gathered up,
trembling in the far depths of the sky. Now and then there is
a convulsion. The rumour becomes tumult as the wave becomes
surge. The horizon, a confused mass of strata, oscillating
ceaselessly, murmurs in a continual undertone. Strange
and sudden outbursts break through the monotony. Cold airs
rush forth, succeeded by warm blasts. The trepidation of the
sea betokens anxious expectation, agony, terror profound.
Suddenly the hurricane comes down, like a wild beast, to drink
of the ocean: a monstrous draught! The sea rises to the invisible
mouth; a mound of water is formed; the swell increases,
and the waterspout appears; the Prester of the ancients, stalactite
above, stalagmite below, a whirling double-inverted cone,
a point in equilibrium upon another, the embrace of two mountains—a
mountain of foam ascending, a mountain of vapour
descending—terrible coition of the cloud and the wave. Like
the column in Holy Writ, the waterspout is dark by day and
luminous by night. In its presence the thunder itself is silent
and seems cowed.</p>

<p>The vast commotion of those solitudes has its gamut, a
terrible crescendo. There are the gust, the squall, the storm,
the gale, the tempest, the whirlwind, the waterspout—the
seven chords of the lyre of the winds, the seven notes of the
firmament. The heavens are a clear space, the sea a vast
round; but a breath passes, they have vanished, and all is fury
and wild confusion.</p>

<p>Such are these inhospitable realms.</p>

<p>The winds rush, fly, swoop down, dwindle away, commence
again; hover above, whistle, roar, and smile; they are frenzied,
wanton, unbridled, or sinking at ease upon the raging waves.
Their howlings have a harmony of their own. They make all
the heavens sonorous. They blow in the cloud as in a trumpet;
they sing through the infinite space with the mingled tones of
clarions, horns, bugles, and trumpets—a sort of Promethean
fanfare.</p>

<p>Such was the music of ancient Pan. Their harmonies are
terrible. They have a colossal joy in the darkness. They
drive and disperse great ships. Night and day, in all seasons,
from the tropics to the pole, there is no truce; sounding their
fatal trumpet through the tangled thickets of the clouds and
waves, they pursue the grim chase of vessels in distress. They
have their packs of bloodhounds, and take their pleasure, setting
them to bark among the rocks and billows. They huddle
the clouds together, and drive them diverse. They mould and
knead the supple waters as with a million hands.</p>

<p>The water is supple because it is incompressible. It slips
away without effort. Borne down on one side, it escapes on
the other. It is thus that waters become waves, and that the
billows are a token of their liberty.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>III</h4>

<h5>THE NOISES EXPLAINED</h5>


<p>The grand descent of winds upon the world takes place at the
equinoxes. At this period the balance of tropic and pole
librates, and the vast atmospheric tides pour their flood upon
one hemisphere and their ebb upon another. The signs of
Libra and Aquarius have reference to these phenomena.</p>

<p>It is the time of tempests.</p>

<p>The sea awaits their coming, keeping silence.</p>

<p>Sometimes the sky looks sickly. Its face is wan. A thick
dark veil obscures it. The mariners observe with uneasiness
the angry aspect of the clouds.</p>

<p>But it is its air of calm contentment which they dread the
most. A smiling sky in the equinoxes is the tempest in gay
disguise. It was under skies like these that "The Tower of
Weeping Women," in Amsterdam, was filled with wives and
mothers scanning the far horizon.</p>

<p>When the vernal or autumnal storms delay to break, they
are gathering strength; hoarding up their fury for more sure
destruction. Beware of the gale that has been long delayed.
It was Angot who said that "the sea pays well old debts."</p>

<p>When the delay is unusually long, the sea betokens her impatience
only by a deeper calm, but the magnetic intensity
manifests itself by what might be called a fiery humour in the
sea. Fire issues from the waves; electric air, phosphoric water.
The sailors feel a strange lassitude. This time is particularly
perilous for iron vessels; their hulls are then liable to produce
variations of the compass, leading them to destruction. The
transatlantic steam-vessel <i>Iowa</i> perished from this cause.</p>

<p>To those who are familiar with the sea, its aspect at these
moments is singular. It may be imagined to be both desiring
and fearing the approach of the cyclone. Certain unions,
though strongly urged by nature, are attended by this strange
conjunction of terror and desire. The lioness in her tenderest
moods flies from the lion. Thus the sea, in the fire of her
passion, trembles at the near approach of her union with the
tempest. The nuptials are prepared. Like the marriages of
the ancient emperors, they are celebrated with immolations.
The fête is heralded with disasters.</p>

<p>Meanwhile, from yonder deeps, from the great open sea,
from the unapproachable latitudes, from the lurid horizon of
the watery waste, from the utmost bounds of the free ocean,
the winds pour down.</p>

<p>Listen; for this is the famous equinox.</p>

<p>The storm prepares mischief. In the old mythology these
entities were recognised, indistinctly moving, in the grand scene
of nature. Eolus plotted with Boreas. The alliance of element
with element is necessary; they divide their task. One has to
give impetus to the wave, the cloud, the stream: night is an
auxiliary, and must be employed. There are compasses to be
falsified, beacons to be extinguished, lanterns of lighthouses to
be masked, stars to be hidden. The sea must lend her aid.
Every storm is preceded by a murmur. Behind the horizon
line there is a premonitory whispering among the hurricanes.</p>

<p>This is the noise which is heard afar off in the darkness amidst
the terrible silence of the sea.</p>

<p>It was this significant whispering which Gilliatt had noted.
The phosphorescence on the water had been the first warning:
this murmur the second.</p>

<p>If the demon Legion exists, he is assuredly no other than the
wind.</p>

<p>The wind is complex, but the air is one.</p>

<p>Hence it follows that all storms are mixed—a principle which
results from the unity of the air.</p>

<p>The entire abyss of heaven takes part in a tempest: the entire
ocean also. The totality of its forces is marshalled for the strife.
A wave is the ocean gulf; a gust is a gulf of the atmosphere. A
contest with a storm is a contest with all the powers of sea
and sky.</p>

<p>It was Messier, that great authority among naval men, the
pensive astronomer of the little lodge at Cluny, who said, "The
wind comes from everywhere and is everywhere." He had no
faith in the idea of winds imprisoned even in inland seas. With
him there were no Mediterranean winds; he declared that
he recognised them as they wandered about the earth. He
affirmed that on a certain day, at a certain hour, the Föhn of
the Lake of Constance, the ancient Favonius of Lucretius, had
traversed the horizon of Paris; on another day, the Bora of the
Adriatic; on another day, the whirling Notus, which is supposed
to be confined in the round of the Cyclades. He indicated
their currents. He did not believe it impossible that the
"Autan," which circulates between Corsica and the Balearic
Isles, could escape from its bounds. He did not admit the
theory of winds imprisoned like bears in their dens. It was he,
too, who said that "every rain comes from the tropics, and
every flash of lightning from the pole." The wind, in fact,
becomes saturated with electricity at the intersection of the
colures which marks the extremity of the axis, and with water
at the equator; bringing moisture from the equatorial line and
the electric fluid from the poles.</p>

<p>The wind is ubiquitous.</p>

<p>It is certainly not meant by this that the winds never move
in zones. Nothing is better established than the existence
of those continuous air currents; and aerial navigation by
means of the wind boats, to which the passion for Greek terminology
has given the name of "aeroscaphes," may one day
succeed in utilising the chief of these streams of wind. The
regular course of air streams is an incontestable fact. There
are both rivers of wind and rivulets of wind, although their
branches are exactly the reverse of water currents: for in the
air it is the rivulets which flow out of the rivers, and the smaller
rivers which flow out of the great streams instead of falling into
them. Hence instead of concentration we have dispersion.</p>

<p>The united action of the winds and the unity of the atmosphere
result from this dispersion. The displacement of one
molecule produces the displacement of another. The vast body
of air becomes subject to one agitation. To these profound
causes of coalition we must add the irregular surface of the
earth, whose mountains furrow the atmosphere, contorting and
diverting the winds from their course, and determining the
directions of counter currents in infinite radiations.</p>

<p>The phenomenon of the wind is the oscillation of two oceans
one against the other; the ocean of air, superimposed upon
the ocean of water, rests upon these currents, and is convulsed
with this vast agitation.</p>

<p>The indivisible cannot produce separate action. No partition
divides wave from wave. The islands of the Channel feel the
influence of the Cape of Good Hope. Navigation everywhere
contends with the same monster; the sea is one hydra. The
waves cover it as with a coat of scales. The ocean is Ceto.</p>

<p>Upon that unity reposes an infinite variety.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>IV</h4>

<h5>TURBA TURMA</h5>


<p>According to the compass there are thirty-two winds, that is
to say, thirty-two points. But these directions may be subdivided
indefinitely. Classed by its directions, the wind is incalculable;
classed by its kinds, it is infinite. Homer himself
would have shrunk from the task of enumerating them.</p>

<p>The polar current encounters the tropical current. Heat and
cold are thus combined; the equilibrium is distributed by a
shock, the wave of wind issues forth and is distended, scattered
and broken up in every direction in fierce streams. The dispersion
of the gusts shakes the streaming locks of the wind upon
the four corners of the horizon.</p>

<p>All the winds which blow are there. The wind of the Gulf
Stream, which disgorges the great fogs of Newfoundland; the
wind of Peru, in the region of silent heavens, where no man ever
heard the thunder roar; the wind of Nova Scotia, where flies
the great auk (<i>Alca impennis</i>) with his furrowed beak; the iron
whirlwinds of the Chinese seas; the wind of Mozambique, which
destroys the canoes and junks; the electric wind, which the
people of Japan denounce by the beating of a gong; the African
wind, which blows between Table Mountain and the Devil's
Peak, where it gains its liberty; the currents of the equator,
which pass over the trade winds, describing a parabola, the
summit of which is always to the west; the Plutonian wind,
which issues from craters, the terrible breath of flames; the
singular wind peculiar to the volcano Awa, which occasions a
perpetual olive tint in the north; the Java monsoon, against
which the people construct those casemates known as hurricane
houses; the branching north winds called by the English
"Bush winds;" the curved squalls of the Straits of Malacca,
observed by Horsburgh; the powerful south-west wind, called
Pampero in Chili, and Rebojo at Buenos Ayres, which carries
the great condor out to sea, and saves him from the pit where
the Indian, concealed under a bullock-hide newly stripped,
watches for him, lying on his back and bending his great bow
with his feet; the chemical wind, which, according to Lemery,
produces thunder-bolts from the clouds; the Harmattan of
the Caffres; the Polar snow-driver, which harnesses itself to the
everlasting icebergs; the wind of the Gulf of Bengal, which
sweeps over a continent to pillage the triangular town of wooden
booths at Nijni-Novogorod, in which is held the great fair of
Asia; the wind of the Cordilleras, agitator of great waves and
forests; the wind of the Australian Archipelago, where the
bee-hunters take the wild hives hidden under the forks of the
branches of the giant eucalyptus; the Sirocco, the Mistral, the
Hurricane, the dry winds, the inundating and diluvian winds,
the torrid winds, which scatter dust from the plains of Brazil
upon the streets of Genoa, which both obey and revolt against
diurnal rotation, and of which Herrara said, "<i>Malo viento torna
contra el sol</i>;" those winds which hunt in couples, conspiring
mischief, the one undoing the work of the other; and those
old winds which assailed Columbus on the coast of Veragua,
and which during forty days, from the 21st of October to the
28th of November 1520, delayed and nearly frustrated Magellan's
approach to the Pacific; and those which dismasted the
Armada and confounded Philip II. Others, too, there are, of
the names of which there is no end. The winds, for instance,
which carry showers of frogs and locusts, and drive before them
clouds of living things across the ocean; those which blow in
what are called "Wind-leaps," and whose function is to destroy
ships at sea; those which at a single blast throw the cargo out
of trim, and compel the vessel to continue her course half
broadside over; the winds which construct the circum-cumuli;
the winds which mass together the circum-strati; the dark
heavy winds swelled with rains; the winds of the hailstorms;
the fever winds, whose approach sets the salt springs and sulphur
springs of Calabria boiling; those which give a glittering appearance
to the fur of African panthers, prowling among the bushes of
Cape Ferro; those which come shaking from the cloud, like the
tongue of a trigonocephal, the terrible forked lightning; and
those which bring whirlwinds of black snow. Such is the legion
of winds.</p>

<p>The Douvres rock heard their distant tramp at the moment
when Gilliatt was constructing his breakwater.</p>

<p>As we have said, the wind means the combination of all the
winds of the earth.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>V</h4>

<h5>GILLIATT'S ALTERNATIVES</h5>


<p>The mysterious forces had chosen their time well.</p>

<p>Chance, if chance exists, is sometimes far-seeing.</p>

<p>While the sloop had been anchored in the little creek of "The
Man Rock," and as long as the machinery had been prisoned in
the wreck, Gilliatt's position had been impregnable. The sloop
was in safety; the machinery sheltered. The Douvres, which
held the hull of the Durande fast, condemned it to slow destruction,
but protected it against unexpected accidents. In any
event, one resource had remained to him. If the engine had
been destroyed, Gilliatt would have been uninjured. He had
still the sloop by which to escape.</p>

<p>But to wait till the sloop was removed from the anchorage
where she was inaccessible; to allow it to be fixed in the defile
of the Douvres; to watch until the sloop, too, was, as it were,
entangled in the rocks; to permit him to complete the salvage,
the moving, and the final embarkation of the machinery; to
do no damage to that wonderful construction by which one man
was enabled to put the whole aboard his bark; to acquiesce, in
fact, in the success of his exploits so far; this was but the trap
which the elements had laid for him. Now for the first time
he began to perceive in all its sinister characteristics the trick
which the sea had been meditating so long.</p>

<p>The machinery, the sloop, and their master were all now within
the gorge of the rocks. They formed but a single point. One
blow, and the sloop might be dashed to pieces on the rock,
the machinery destroyed, and Gilliatt drowned.</p>

<p>The situation could not have been more critical.</p>

<p>The sphinx, which men have imagined concealing herself in
the cloud, seemed to mock him with a dilemma.</p>

<p>"Go or stay."</p>

<p>To go would have been madness; to remain was terrible.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VI</h4>

<h5>THE COMBAT</h5>


<p>Gilliatt ascended to the summit of the Great Douvre.</p>

<p>From hence he could see around the horizon.</p>

<p>The western side was appalling. A wall of cloud spread
across it, barring the wide expanse from side to side, and ascending
slowly from the horizon towards the zenith. This wall,
straight lined, vertical, without a crevice in its height, without
a rent in its structure, seemed built by the square and measured
by the plumb-line. It was cloud in the likeness of granite. Its
escarpment, completely perpendicular at the southern extremity,
curved a little towards the north, like a bent sheet of iron,
presenting the steep slippery face of an inclined plane. The
dark wall enlarged and grew; but its entablature never ceased
for a moment to be parallel with the horizon line, which was
almost indistinguishable in the gathering darkness. Silently,
and altogether, the airy battlements ascended. No undulation,
no wrinkle, no projection changed its shape or moved its place.
The aspect of this immobility in movement was impressive.
The sun, pale in the midst of a strange sickly transparence,
lighted up this outline of the Apocalypse. Already the cloudy
bank had blotted out one half the space of the sky: shelving
like the fearful talus of the abyss. It was the uprising of a
dark mountain between earth and heaven.</p>

<p>It was night falling suddenly upon midday.</p>

<p>There was a heat in the air as from an oven door, coming from
that mysterious mass on mass. The sky, which from blue had
become white, was now turning from white to a slatey grey.
The sea beneath was leaden-hued and dull. There was no
breath, no wave, no noise. Far as eye could reach, the desert
ocean. No sail was visible on any side. The birds had disappeared.
Some monstrous treason seemed abroad.</p>

<p>The wall of cloud grew visibly larger.</p>

<p>This moving mountain of vapours, which was approaching the
Douvres, was one of those clouds which might be called the
clouds of battle. Sinister appearances; some strange, furtive
glance seemed cast upon the beholder through that obscure mass
up-piled.</p>

<p>The approach was terrible.</p>

<p>Gilliatt observed it closely, and muttered to himself, "I am
thirsty enough, but you will give me plenty to drink."</p>

<p>He stood there motionless a few moments, his eye fixed upon
the cloud bank, as if mentally taking a sounding of the tempest.</p>

<p>His <i>galérienne</i> was in the pocket of his jacket; he took it out
and placed it on his head. Then he fetched from the cave,
which had so long served him for a sleeping-place, a few things
which he had kept there in reserve; he put on his overalls, and
attired himself in his waterproof overcoat, like a knight who
puts on his armour at the moment of battle. He had no shoes;
but his naked feet had become hardened to the rocks.</p>

<p>This preparation for the storm being completed, he looked
down upon his breakwater, grasped the knotted cord hurriedly,
descended from the plateau of the Douvre, stepped on to the
rocks below, and hastened to his store cavern. A few moments
later he was at work. The vast silent cloud might have heard
the strokes of his hammer. With the nails, ropes, and beams
which still remained, he constructed for the eastern gullet a
second frame, which he succeeded in fixing at ten or twelve feet
from the other.</p>

<p>The silence was still profound. The blades of grass between
the cracks of the rocks were not stirred.</p>

<p>The sun disappeared suddenly. Gilliatt looked up.</p>

<p>The rising cloud had just reached it. It was like the blotting
out of day, succeeded by a mingled pale reflection.</p>

<p>The immense wall of cloud had changed its appearance. It
no longer retained its unity. It had curved on reaching the
zenith, whence it spread horizontally over the rest of the
heavens. It had now its various stages. The tempest formation
was visible, like the strata in the side of a trench. It was
possible to distinguish the layers of the rain from the beds of
hail. There was no lightning, but a horrible, diffused glare;
for the idea of horror may be attached to light. The vague
breathing of the storm was audible; the silence was broken by
an obscure palpitation. Gilliatt, silent also, watched the giant
blocks of vapour grouping themselves overhead forming the
shapeless mass of clouds. Upon the horizon brooded and
lengthened out a band of mist of ashen hue; in the zenith,
another band of lead colour. Pale, ragged fragments of cloud
hung from the great mass above upon the mist below. The
pile of cloud which formed the background was wan, dull,
gloomy. A thin, whitish transverse cloud, coming no one could
tell whither, cut the high dark wall obliquely from north to
south. One of the extremities of this cloud trailed along the
surface of the sea. At the point where it touched the waters,
a dense red vapour was visible in the midst of the darkness.
Below it, smaller clouds, quite black and very low, were flying
as if bewildered or moved by opposite currents of air. The
immense cloud beyond increased from all points at once,
darkened the eclipse, and continued to spread its sombre pall.
In the east, behind Gilliatt, there was only one clear porch in the
heavens, which was rapidly being closed. Without any feeling
of wind abroad, a strange flight of grey downy particles seemed
to pass; they were fine and scattered as if some gigantic bird
had been plucked of its plumage behind the bank of cloud. A
dark compact roof had gradually formed itself, which on the
verge of the horizon touched the sea, and mingled in darkness
with it. The beholder had a vague sense of something advancing
steadily towards him. It was vast, heavy, ominous. Suddenly
an immense peal of thunder burst upon the air.</p>

<p>Gilliatt himself felt the shock. The rude reality in the midst
of that visionary region has something in it terrific. The listener
might fancy that he hears something falling in the chamber of
giants. No electric flash accompanied the report. It was a
blind peal. The silence was profound again. There was an
interval, as when combatants take up their position. Then
appeared slowly, one after the other, great shapeless flashes;
these flashes were silent. The wall of cloud was now a vast
cavern, with roofs and arches. Outlines of forms were traceable
among them; monstrous heads were vaguely shadowed forth;
rocks seemed to stretch out; elephants bearing turrets, seen
for a moment, vanished. A column of vapour, straight, round,
and dark, and surmounted by a white mist, simulated the form
of a colossal steam-vessel engulfed, hissing, and smoking beneath
the waves. Sheets of cloud undulated like folds of giant flags.
In the centre, under a thick purple pall, a nucleus of dense fog
sunk motionless, inert, impenetrable by the electric fires; a sort
of hideous fœtus in the bosom of the tempest.</p>

<p>Suddenly Gilliatt felt a breath moving his hair. Two or three
large spots of rain fell heavily around him on the rock. Then
there was a second thunder-clap. The wind was rising.</p>

<p>The terror of darkness was at its highest point. The first
peal of thunder had shaken the sea; the second rent the wall
of cloud from top to base; breach was visible; the pent-up
deluge rushed towards it; the rent became like a gulf filled
with rain. The outpouring of the tempest had begun.</p>

<p>The moment was terrible.</p>

<p>Rain, wind, lightnings, thunder, waves swirling upwards to
the clouds, foam, hoarse noises, whistlings, mingled together
like monsters suddenly unloosened.</p>

<p>For a solitary man, imprisoned with an overloaded vessel,
between two dangerous rocks in mid-ocean, no crisis could have
been more menacing. The danger of the tide, over which he
had triumphed, was nothing compared with the danger of the
tempest.</p>

<p>Surrounded on all sides by dangers, Gilliatt, at the last
moment, and before the crowning peril, had developed an
ingenious strategy. He had secured his basis of operations in
the enemies' territory; had pressed the rock into his service.
The Douvres, originally his enemy, had become his second in
that immense duel. Out of that sepulchre he had constructed
a fortress. He was built up among those formidable sea ruins.
He was blockaded, but well defended. He had, so to speak,
set his back against the wall, and stood face to face with the
hurricane. He had barricaded the narrow strait, that highway of
the waves. This, indeed, was the only possible course. It seemed
as if the ocean, like other despots, might be brought to reason
by the aid of barricades. The sloop might be considered secure
on three sides. Closely wedged between the two interior walls
of the rock, made fast by three anchorings, she was sheltered
from the north by the Little Douvre, on the south by the Great
one; terrible escarpments, more accustomed to wreck vessels
than to save them. On the western side she was protected by
the frame of timbers made fast and nailed to the rocks—a tried
barrier which had withstood the rude flood-tide of the sea; a
veritable citadel-gate, having for its sides the columns of the
rock—the two Douvres themselves. Nothing was to be feared
from that side. It was on the eastern side only that there was
danger.</p>

<p>On that side there was no protection but the breakwater. A
breakwater is an apparatus for dividing and distributing. It
requires at least two frames. Gilliatt had only had time to
construct one. He was compelled to build the second in the
very presence of the tempest.</p>

<p>Fortunately the wind came from the north-west. The wind
is not always adroit in its attacks. The north-west wind, which
is the ancient "galerno," had little effect upon the Douvres.
It assailed the rocks in flank, and drove the waves neither
against the one nor the other of the two gullets; so that instead
of rushing into a defile, they dashed themselves against a wall.</p>

<p>But the currents of the wind are curved, and it was probable
that there would be some sudden change. If it should veer to
the east before the second frame could be constructed the peril
would be great. The irruption of the sea into the gorge would
be complete, and all would probably be lost.</p>

<p>The wildness of the storm went on increasing. The essence
of a tempest is the rapid succession of its blows. That is its
strength; but it is also its weakness. Its fury gives the opportunity
to human intelligence, and man spies its weak points
for his defence; but under what overwhelming assaults! No
respite, no interruption, no truce, no pause for taking breath.
There seems an unspeakable cowardice in that prodigality of
inexhaustible resources.</p>

<p>All the tumult of the wide expanse rushed towards the
Douvres. Voices were heard in the darkness. What could
they be? The ancient terror of the sea was there. At times
they seemed to speak as if some one was uttering words of
command. There were clamours, strange trepidations, and
then that majestic roar which the mariners call the "Ocean
cry." The indefinite and flying eddies of the wind whistled,
while curling the waves and flinging them like giant quoits,
cast by invisible athletes, against the breakers. The enormous
surf streamed over all the rocks; torrents above; foam below.
Then the roaring was redoubled. No uproar of men or beasts
could yield an idea of that din which mingled with the incessant
breaking of the sea. The clouds cannonaded, the hailstones
poured their volleys, the surf mounted to the assault. As far
as eye could reach, the sea was white; ten leagues of yeasty
water filled the horizon. Doors of fire were opened, clouds
seemed burnt by clouds, and showed like smoke above a nebulous
red mass, resembling burning embers. Floating conflagrations
rushed together and amalgamated, each changing the shape of
the other. From the midst of the dark roof a terrible arsenal
appeared to be emptied out, hurling downward from the gulf,
pell-mell, waterspouts, hail torrents, purple fire, phosphoric
gleams, darkness, and lightnings.</p>

<p>Meanwhile Gilliatt seemed to pay no attention to the storm.
His head was bent over his work. The second framework began
to approach completion. To every clap of thunder he replied
with a blow of his hammer, making a cadence which was audible
even amidst that tumult. He was bareheaded, for a gust had
carried away his <i>galérienne</i>.</p>

<p>He suffered from a burning thirst. Little pools of rain had
formed in the rocks around him. From time to time he took
some water in the hollow of his hand and drank. Then, without
even looking upward to observe the storm, he applied himself
anew to his task.</p>

<p>All might depend upon a moment. He knew the fate that
awaited him if his breakwater should not be completed in time.
Of what avail could it be to lose a moment in looking for the
approach of death?</p>

<p>The turmoil around him was like that of a vast bubbling
cauldron. Crash and uproar were everywhere. Sometimes
the lightning seemed to descend a sort of ladder. The electric
flame returned incessantly to the same points of the rock,
where there were probably metallic veins. Hailstones fell of
enormous size. Gilliatt was compelled to shake the folds of his
overcoat, even the pockets of which became filled with hail.</p>

<p>The storm had now rotated to the west, and was expending
its fury upon the barricades of the two Douvres. But Gilliatt
had faith in his breakwaters, and with good reason. These
barricades, made of a great portion of the fore-part of the
Durande, took the shock of the waves easily. Elasticity is a
resistance. The experiments of Stephenson establish the fact
that against the waves, which are themselves elastic, a raft of
timber, joined and chained together in a certain fashion, will
form a more powerful obstacle than a breakwater of masonry.
The barriers of the Douvres fulfilled these conditions. They
were, moreover, so ingeniously made fast, that the waves
striking them beneath were like hammers beating in nails,
pressing and consolidating the work upon the rocks. To
demolish them it would have been necessary to overthrow
the Douvres themselves. The surf, in fact, was only able to
cast over upon the sloop some flakes of foam. On that side,
thanks to the barrier, the tempest ended only in harmless insult.
Gilliatt turned his back upon the scene. He heard composedly
its useless rage upon the rocks behind him.</p>

<p>The foam-flakes coming from all sides were like flights of
down. The vast irritated ocean deluged the rocks, dashed over
them and raged within, penetrated into the network of their
interior fissures, and issued again from the granitic masses by
the narrow chinks, forming a kind of inexhaustible fountains
playing peacefully in the midst of that deluge. Here and there
a silvery network fell gracefully from these spouts in the sea.</p>

<p>The second frame of the eastern barrier was nearly completed.
A few more knots of rope and ends of chains and this new rampart
would be ready to play its part in barring out the storm.</p>

<p>Suddenly there was a great brightness; the rain ceased; the
clouds rolled asunder; the wind had just shifted; a sort of
high, dark window opened in the zenith, and the lightnings
were extinguished. The end seemed to have come. It was
but the commencement.</p>

<p>The change of wind was from the north-west to the north-east.</p>

<p>The storm was preparing to burst forth again with a new
legion of hurricanes. The north was about to mount to the
assault. Sailors call this dreaded moment of transition the
"Return storm." The southern wind brings most rain, the
north wind most lightning.</p>

<p>The attack, coming now from the east, was directed against
the weak point of the position.</p>

<p>This time Gilliatt interrupted his work and looked around
him.</p>

<p>He stood erect, upon a curved projection of the rock behind
the second barrier, which was nearly finished. If the first
frame had been carried away, it would have broken down the
second, which was not yet consolidated, and must have crushed
him. Gilliatt, in the place that he had chosen, must in that
case have been destroyed before seeing the sloop, the machinery,
and all his work shattered and swallowed up in the gulf. Such
was the possibility which awaited him. He accepted it, and
contemplated it sternly.</p>

<p>In that wreck of all his hope, to die at once would have been
his desire; to die first, as he would have regarded it—for the
machinery produced in his mind the effect of a living being.
He moved aside his hair, which was beaten over his eyes by the
wind, grasped his trusty mallet, drew himself up in a menacing
attitude, and awaited the event.</p>

<p>He was not kept long in suspense.</p>

<p>A flash of lightning gave the signal; the livid opening in the
zenith closed; a driving torrent of rain fell; then all became
dark, save where the lightnings broke forth once more. The
attack had recommenced in earnest.</p>

<p>A heavy swell, visible from time to time in the blaze of the
lightning, was rolling in the east beyond "The Man Rock." It
resembled a huge wall of glass. It was green and without
foam, and it stretched across the wide expanse. It was advancing
towards the breakwater, increasing as it approached. It
was a singular kind of gigantic cylinder, rolling upon the ocean.
The thunder kept up a hollow rumbling.</p>

<p>The great wave struck "The Man Rock," broke in twain, and
passed beyond. The broken wave, rejoined, formed a mountain
of water, and instead of advancing in parallel line as before,
came down perpendicularly upon the breakwater.</p>

<p>The shock was terrific: the whole wave became a roaring surf.</p>

<p>It is impossible for those who have not witnessed them to
imagine those snowy avalanches which the sea thus precipitates,
and under which it engulfs for the moment rocks of more
than a hundred feet in height, such, for example, as the Great
Anderlo at Guernsey, and the Pinnacle at Jersey. At Saint
Mary of Madagascar it passes completely over the promontory
of Tintingue.</p>

<p>For some moments the sea drowned everything. Nothing
was visible except the furious waters, an enormous breadth of
foam, the whiteness of a winding-sheet blowing in the draught
of a sepulchre; nothing was heard but the roaring storm working
devastation around.</p>

<p>When the foam subsided, Gilliatt was still standing at his
post.</p>

<p>The barrier had stood firm. Not a chain was broken, not a
nail displaced. It had exhibited under the trial the two chief
qualities of a breakwater; it had proved flexible as a hurdle
and firm as a wall. The surf falling upon it had dissolved into
a shower of drops.</p>

<p>A river of foam rushing along the zigzags of the defile subsided
as it approached the sloop.</p>

<p>The man who had put this curb upon the fury of the ocean
took no rest.</p>

<p>The storm fortunately turned aside its fury for a moment.
The fierce attack of the waves was renewed upon the wall of
the rock. There was a respite, and Gilliatt took advantage of
it to complete the interior barrier.</p>

<p>The daylight faded upon his labours. The hurricane continued
its violence upon the flank of the rocks with a mournful
solemnity. The stores of fire and water in the sky poured out
incessantly without exhausting themselves. The undulations of
the wind above and below were like the movements of a dragon.</p>

<p>Nightfall brought scarcely any deeper night. The change
was hardly felt, for the darkness was never complete. Tempests
alternately darkening and illumining by their lightnings, are
merely intervals of the visible and invisible. All is pale glare,
and then all is darkness. Spectral shapes issue forth suddenly,
and return as suddenly into the deep shade.</p>

<p>A phosphoric zone, tinged with the hue of the aurora borealis,
appeared like ghastly flames behind the dense clouds, giving to
all things a wan aspect, and making the rain-drifts luminous.</p>

<p>This uncertain light aided Gilliatt, and directed him in his
operations. By its help he was enabled to raise the forward
barrier. The breakwater was now almost complete. As he
was engaged in making fast a powerful cable to the last beam,
the gale blew directly in his face. This compelled him to raise
his head. The wind had shifted abruptly to the north-east.
The assault upon the eastern gullet recommenced. Gilliatt
cast his eyes around the horizon. Another great wall of water
was approaching.</p>

<p>The wave broke with a great shock; a second followed; then
another and another still; then five or six almost together;
then a last shock of tremendous force.</p>

<p>This last wave, which was an accumulation of forces, had a
singular resemblance to a living thing. It would not have been
difficult to imagine in the midst of that swelling mass the shapes
of fins and gill-coverings. It fell heavily and broke upon the
barriers. Its almost animal form was torn to pieces in the shape
of spouts and gushes, resembling the crushing to death of some
sea hydra upon that block of rocks and timbers. The swell
rushed through, subsiding but devastating as it went. The
huge wave seemed to bite and cling to its victim as it died. The
rock shook to its base. A savage howling mingled with the
roar; the foam flew far like the spouting of a leviathan.</p>

<p>The subsidence exhibited the extent of the ravages of the
surf. This last escalade had not been ineffectual. The breakwater
had suffered this time. A long and heavy beam, torn
from the first barrier, had been carried over the second, and
hurled violently upon the projecting rock on which Gilliatt had
stood but a moment before. By good fortune he had not
returned there. Had he done so, his death had been inevitable.</p>

<p>There was a remarkable circumstance in the fall of this beam,
which by preventing the framework rebounding, saved Gilliatt
from greater dangers. It even proved useful to him, as will be
seen, in another way.</p>

<p>Between the projecting rock and the interior wall of the
defile there was a large interval, something like the notch of an
axe, or the split of a wedge. One of the extremities of the
timber hurled into the air by the waves had stuck fast into this
notch in falling. The gap had become enlarged.</p>

<p>Gilliatt was struck with an idea. It was that of bearing
heavily on the other extremity.</p>

<p>The beam caught by one end in the nook, which it had
widened, projected from it straight as an outstretched arm.
This species of arm projected parallel with the anterior wall of
the defile, and the disengaged end stretched from its resting
place about eighteen or twenty inches. A good distance for
the object to be attained.</p>

<p>Gilliatt raised himself by means of his hands, feet, and knees
to the escarpment, and then turned his back, pressing both his
shoulders against the enormous lever. The beam was long,
which increased its raising power. The rock was already
loosened; but he was compelled to renew his efforts again and
again. The sweat-drops rolled from his forehead as rapidly
as the spray. The fourth attempt exhausted all his powers.
There was a cracking noise; the gap spreading in the shape of a
fissure, opened its vast jaws, and the heavy mass fell into the
narrow space of the defile with a noise like the echo of the
thunder.</p>

<p>The mass fell straight, and without breaking; resting in its
bed like a Druid cromlech precipitated in one piece.</p>

<p>The beam which had served as a lever descended with the
rock, and Gilliatt, stumbling forward as it gave way, narrowly
escaped falling.</p>

<p>The bed of the pass at this part was full of huge round stones,
and there was little water. The monolith lying in the boiling
foam, the flakes of which fell on Gilliatt where he stood, stretched
from side to side of the great parallel rocks of the defile, and
formed a transversal wall, a sort of cross-stroke between the
two escarpments. Its two ends touched the rocks. It had
been a little too long to lie flat, but its summit of soft rock was
struck off with the fall. The result of this fall was a singular
sort of <i>cul-de-sac</i>, which may still be seen. The water behind
this stony barrier is almost always tranquil.</p>

<p>This was a rampart more invincible still than the forward
timbers of the Durande fixed between the two Douvres.</p>

<p>The barrier came opportunely.</p>

<p>The assaults of the sea had continued. The obstinacy of the
waves is always increased by an obstacle. The first frame
began to show signs of breaking up. One breach, however
small, in a breakwater, is always serious. It inevitably
enlarges, and there is no means of supplying its place, for
the sea would sweep away the workmen.</p>

<p>A flash which lighted up the rocks revealed to Gilliatt the
nature of the mischief; the beams broken down, the ends of
rope and fragments of chain swinging in the winds, and a rent
in the centre of the apparatus. The second frame was intact.</p>

<p>Though the block of stone so powerfully overturned by
Gilliatt in the defile behind the breakwater was the strongest
possible barrier, it had a defect. It was too low. The surge
could not destroy, but could sweep over it.</p>

<p>It was useless to think of building it higher. Nothing but
masses of rock could avail upon a barrier of stone; but how
could such masses be detached? or, if detached, how could
they be moved, or raised, or piled, or fixed? Timbers may be
added, but rocks cannot.</p>

<p>Gilliatt was not Enceladus.</p>

<p>The very little height of this rocky isthmus rendered him
anxious.</p>

<p>The effects of this fault were not long in showing themselves.
The assaults upon the breakwater were incessant; the heavy
seas seemed not merely to rage, but to attack with determination
to destroy it. A sort of trampling noise was heard upon
the jolted framework.</p>

<p>Suddenly the end of a binding strake, detached from the dislocated
frame, was swept away over the second barrier and
across the transversal rock, falling in the defile, where the water
seized and carried it into the sinuosities of the pass. Gilliatt
lost sight of it. It seemed probable that it would do some
injury to the sloop. Fortunately, the water in the interior of
the rocks, shut in on all sides, felt little of the commotion without.
The waves there were comparatively trifling, and the
shock was not likely to be very severe. For the rest, he had
little time to spare for reflection upon this mishap. Every
variety of danger was arising at once; the tempest was concentrated
upon the vulnerable point; destruction was imminent.</p>

<p>The darkness was profound for a moment: the lightnings
paused—a sort of sinister connivance. The cloud and the sea
became one: there was a dull peal.</p>

<p>This was followed by a terrible outburst. The frame which
formed the front of the barriers was swept away. The fragments
of beams were visible in the rolling waters. The sea was
using the first breakwater as an engine for making a breach in
the second.</p>

<p>Gilliatt experienced the feeling of a general who sees his
advanced guard driven in.</p>

<p>The second construction of beams resisted the shock. The
apparatus behind it was powerfully secured and buttressed.
But the broken frame was heavy, and was at the mercy of the
waves, which were incessantly hurling it forward and withdrawing
it. The ropes and chains which remained unsevered
prevented its entirely breaking up, and the qualities which
Gilliatt had given it as a means of defence made it, in the end, a
more effective weapon of destruction. Instead of a buckler, it
had become a battering-ram. Besides this, it was now full of
irregularities from breaking; ends of timbers projected from
all parts; and it was, as it were, covered with teeth and spikes.
No sort of arm could have been more effective, or more fitted
for the handling of the tempest. It was the projectile, while
the sea played the part of the catapult.</p>

<p>The blows succeeded each other with a dismal regularity.
Gilliatt, thoughtful and anxious, behind that barricaded portal,
listened to the sound of death knocking loudly for admittance.</p>

<p>He reflected with bitterness that, but for the fatal entanglement
of the funnel of the Durande in the wreck, he would have
been at that very moment, and even since the morning, once
more at Guernsey, in the port, with the sloop out of danger and
with the machinery saved.</p>

<p>The dreaded moment arrived. The destruction was complete.
There was a sound like a death-rattle. The entire
frame of the breakwater, the double apparatus crushed and
mingled confusedly, came in a whirl of foam, rushing upon the
stone barricade like chaos upon a mountain, where it stopped.
Here the fragments lay together, a mass of beams penetrable
by the waves, but still breaking their force. The conquered
barrier struggled nobly against destruction. The waves had
shattered it, and in their turn were shattered against it. Though
overthrown, it still remained in some degree effective. The
rock which barred its passage, an immovable obstacle held it
fast. The defile, as we have said, was very narrow at that
point; the victorious whirlwind had driven forward, mingled
and piled up the wreck of the breakwater in this narrow pass.
The very violence of the assault, by heaping up the mass and
driving the broken ends one into the other, had contributed to
make the pile firm. It was destroyed, but immovable. A few
pieces of timber only were swept away and dispersed by the
waves. One passed through the air very near to Gilliatt. He
felt the counter current upon his forehead.</p>

<p>Some waves, however, of that kind which in great tempests
return with an imperturbable regularity, swept over the ruins
of the breakwater. They fell into the defile, and in spite of the
many angles of the passage, set the waters within in commotion.
The waters began to roll through the gorge ominously. The
mysterious embraces of the waves among the rocks were audible.</p>

<p>What means were there of preventing this agitation extending
as far as the sloop? It would not require a long time for
the blast of wind to create a tempest through all the windings
of the pass. A few heavy seas would be sufficient to stave in
the sloop and scatter her burden.</p>

<p>Gilliatt shuddered as he reflected.</p>

<p>But he was not disconcerted. No defeat could daunt his soul.</p>

<p>The hurricane had now discovered the true plan of attack,
and was rushing fiercely between the two walls of the strait.</p>

<p>Suddenly a crash was heard, resounding and prolonging itself
through the defile at some distance behind him: a crash more
terrible than any he had yet heard.</p>

<p>It came from the direction of the sloop.</p>

<p>Something disastrous was happening there.</p>

<p>Gilliatt hastened towards it.</p>

<p>From the eastern gullet where he was, he could not see the
sloop on account of the sharp turns of the pass. At the last
turn he stopped and waited for the lightning.</p>

<p>The first flash revealed to him the position of affairs.</p>

<p>The rush of the sea through the eastern entrance had been
met by a blast of wind from the other end. A disaster was near
at hand.</p>

<p>The sloop had received no visible damage; anchored as she
was, the storm had little power over her, but the carcase of
the Durande was distressed.</p>

<p>In such a tempest, the wreck presented a considerable surface.
It was entirely out of the sea in the air, exposed. The breach
which Gilliatt had made, and which he had passed the engine
through, had rendered the hull still weaker. The keelson was
snapped, the vertebral column of the skeleton was broken.</p>

<p>The hurricane had passed over it. Scarcely more than this
was needed to complete its destruction. The planking of the
deck had bent like an opened book. The dismemberment had
begun. It was the noise of this dislocation which had reached
Gilliatt's ears in the midst of the tempest.</p>

<p>The disaster which presented itself as he approached appeared
almost irremediable.</p>

<p>The square opening which he had cut in the keel had become
a gaping wound. The wind had converted the smooth-cut
hole into a ragged fracture. This transverse breach separated
the wreck in two. The after-part, nearest to the sloop, had
remained firm in its bed of rocks. The forward portion which
faced him was hanging. A fracture, while it holds, is a sort of
hinge. The whole mass oscillated, as the wind moved it, with
a doleful noise. Fortunately the sloop was no longer beneath it.</p>

<p>But this swinging movement shook the other portion of the
hull, still wedged and immovable as it was between the two
Douvres. From shaking to casting down the distance is not
far. Under the obstinate assaults of the gale, the dislocated
part might suddenly carry away the other portion, which almost
touched the sloop. In this case, the whole wreck, together with
the sloop and the engine, must be swept into the sea and
swallowed up.</p>

<p>All this presented itself to his eyes. It was the end of all.
How could it be prevented?</p>

<p>Gilliatt was one of those who are accustomed to snatch the
means of safety out of danger itself. He collected his ideas for
a moment. Then he hastened to his arsenal and brought his
hatchet.</p>

<p>The mallet had served him well, it was now the turn of the axe.</p>

<p>He mounted upon the wreck, got a footing on that part of the
planking which had not given way, and leaning over the precipice
of the pass between the Douvres, he began to cut away the
broken joists and the planking which supported the hanging
portion of the hull.</p>

<p>His object was to effect the separation of the two parts of the
wreck, to disencumber the half which remained firm, to throw
overboard what the waves had seized, and thus share the prey
with the storm. The hanging portion of the wreck, borne down
by the wind and by its own weight, adhered only at one or two
points. The entire wreck resembled a folding-screen, one leaf
of which, half-hanging, beat against the other. Five or six
pieces of the planking only, bent and started, but not broken,
still held. Their fractures creaked and enlarged at every gust,
and the axe, so to speak, had but to help the labour of the wind.
This more than half-severed condition, while it increased the
facility of the work, also rendered it dangerous. The whole
might give way beneath him at any moment.</p>

<p>The tempest had reached its highest point. The convulsion
of the sea reached the heavens. Hitherto the storm had been
supreme, it had seemed to work its own imperious will, to give
the impulse, to drive the waves to frenzy, while still preserving
a sort of sinister lucidity. Below was fury—above, anger. The
heavens are the breath, the ocean only foam, hence the authority
of the wind. But the intoxication of its own horrors had confused
it. It had become a mere whirlwind; it was a blindness
leading to night. There are times when tempests become
frenzied, when the heavens are attacked with a sort of delirium;
when the firmament raves and hurls its lightnings blindly. No
terror is greater than this. It is a hideous moment. The
trembling of the rock was at its height. Every storm has a
mysterious course, but now it loses its appointed path. It is
the most dangerous point of the tempest. "At that moment,"
says Thomas Fuller, "the wind is a furious maniac." It is at
that instant that that continuous discharge of electricity takes
place which Piddington calls "the cascade of lightnings." It
is at that instant that in the blackest spot of the clouds, none
know why, unless it be to spy the universal terror, a circle of
blue light appears, which the Spanish sailors of ancient times
called the eye of the tempest, <i>el ojo de la tempestad</i>. That
terrible eye looked down upon Gilliatt.</p>

<p>Gilliatt on his part was surveying the heavens. He raised his
head now. After every stroke of his hatchet he stood erect
and gazed upwards, almost haughtily. He was, or seemed to
be, too near destruction not to feel self-sustained. Would he
despair? No! In the presence of the wildest fury of the ocean
he was watchful as well as bold. He planted his feet only
where the wreck was firm. He ventured his life, and yet was
careful; for his determined spirit, too, had reached its highest
point. His strength had grown tenfold greater. He had become
heated with his own intrepidity. The strokes of his
hatchet were like blows of defiance. He seemed to have gained
in directness what the tempest had lost. A pathetic struggle!
On the one hand, an indefatigable will; on the other, inexhaustible
power. It was a contest with the elements for the
prize at his feet. The clouds took the shape of Gorgon masks
in the immensity of the heavens; every possible form of terror
appeared; the rain came from the sea, the surf from the cloud;
phantoms of the wind bent down; meteoric faces revealed
themselves and were again eclipsed, leaving the darkness more
monstrous: then there was nothing seen but the torrents
coming from all sides—a boiling sea; cumuli heavy with hail,
ashen-hued, ragged-edged, appeared seized with a sort of whirling
frenzy; strange rattlings filled the air; the inverse currents
of electricity observed by Volta darted their sudden flashes
from cloud to cloud. The prolongation of the lightnings was
terrible; the flashes passed near to Gilliatt. The very ocean
seemed astonished. He passed to and fro upon the tottering
wreck, making the deck tremble under his steps, striking, cutting,
hacking with the hatchet in his hand, pallid in the gleam
of the lightning, his long hair streaming, his feet naked, in rags,
his face covered with the foam of the sea, but grand still amid
that maelstrom of the thunderstorm.</p>

<p>Against these furious powers man has no weapon but his
invention. Invention was Gilliatt's triumph. His object was
to allow all the dislocated portions of the wreck to fall together.
For this reason he cut away the broken portions without entirely
separating them, leaving some parts on which they still
swung. Suddenly he stopped, holding his axe in the air. The
operation was complete. The entire portion went with a
crash.</p>

<p>The mass rolled down between the two Douvres, just below
Gilliatt, who stood upon the wreck, leaning over and observing
the fall. It fell perpendicularly into the water, struck the
rocks, and stopped in the defile before touching the bottom.
Enough remained out of the water to rise more than twelve feet
above the waves. The vertical mass of planking formed a wall
between the two Douvres; like the rock overturned crosswise
higher up the defile, it allowed only a slight stream of foam to
pass through at its two extremities, and thus was a fifth barricade
improvised by Gilliatt against the tempest in that passage
of the seas.</p>

<p>The hurricane itself, in its blind fury, had assisted in the construction
of this last barrier.</p>

<p>It was fortunate that the proximity of the two walls had prevented
the mass of wreck from falling to the bottom. This
circumstance gave the barricade greater height; the water,
besides, could flow under the obstacle, which diminished the
power of the waves. That which passes below cannot pass
over. This is partly the secret of the floating breakwater.</p>

<p>Henceforth, let the storm do what it might, there was nothing
to fear for the sloop or the machinery. The water around them
could not become agitated again. Between the barrier of the
Douvres, which covered them on the west, and the barricade
which protected them from the east, no heavy sea or wind could
reach them.</p>

<p>Gilliatt had plucked safety out of the catastrophe itself.
The storm had been his fellow-labourer in the work.</p>

<p>This done, he took a little water in the palm of his hand from
one of the rain-pools, and drank: and then, looking upward at
the storm, said with a smile, "Bungler!"</p>

<p>Human intelligence combating with brute force experiences
an ironical joy in demonstrating the stupidity of its antagonist,
and compelling it to serve the very objects of its fury, and
Gilliatt felt something of that immemorial desire to insult his
invisible enemy, which is as old as the heroes of the <i>Iliad</i>.</p>

<p>He descended to the sloop and examined it by the gleam of
the lightning. The relief which he had been able to give to his
distressed bark was well-timed. She had been much shaken
during the last hour, and had begun to give way. A hasty
glance revealed no serious injury. Nevertheless, he was certain
that the vessel had been subjected to violent shocks. As soon
as the waves had subsided, the hull had righted itself; the
anchors had held fast; as to the machine, the four chains had
supported it admirably.</p>

<p>While Gilliatt was completing this survey, something white
passed before his eyes and vanished in the gloom. It was a
sea-mew.</p>

<p>No sight could be more welcome in tempestuous weather.
When the birds reappear the storm is departing. The thunder
redoubled; another good sign.</p>

<p>The violent efforts of the storm had broken its force. All
mariners know that the last ordeal is severe, but short. The
excessive violence of the thunderstorm is the herald of the end.</p>

<p>The rain stopped suddenly. Then there was only a surly
rumbling in the heavens. The storm ceased with the suddenness
of a plank falling to the ground. The immense mass of
clouds became disorganised. A strip of clear sky appeared
between them. Gilliatt was astonished: it was broad daylight.</p>

<p>The tempest had lasted nearly twenty hours.</p>

<p>The wind which had brought the storm carried it away. A
dark pile was diffused over the horizon, the broken clouds were
flying in confusion across the sky. From one end to the other
of the line there was a movement of retreat: a long muttering
was heard, gradually decreasing, a few last drops of rain fell,
and all those dark masses charged with thunder, departed like
a terrible multitude of chariots.</p>

<p>Suddenly the wide expanse of sky became blue.</p>

<p>Gilliatt perceived that he was wearied. Sleep swoops down
upon the exhausted frame like a bird upon its prey. He
drooped and sank upon the deck of the bark without choosing
his position, and there slept. Stretched at length and inert,
he remained thus for some hours, scarcely distinguishable from
the beams and joists among which he lay.</p>



