<h4>I</h4>

<h5>HE WHO IS HUNGRY IS NOT ALONE</h5>


<p>When he awakened he was hungry.</p>

<p>The sea was growing calmer. But there was still a heavy
swell, which made his departure, for the present at least, impossible.
The day, too, was far advanced. For the sloop with
its burden to get to Guernsey before midnight, it was necessary
to start in the morning.</p>

<p>Although pressed by hunger, Gilliatt began by stripping himself,
the only means of getting warmth. His clothing was
saturated by the storm, but the rain had washed out the sea-water,
which rendered it possible to dry them.</p>

<p>He kept nothing on but his trousers, which he turned up
nearly to the knees.</p>

<p>His overcoat, jacket, overalls, and sheepskin he spread out
and fixed with large round stones here and there.</p>

<p>Then he thought of eating.</p>

<p>He had recourse to his knife, which he was careful to sharpen,
and to keep always in good condition; and he detached from
the rocks a few limpets, similar in kind to the <i>clonisses</i> of the
Mediterranean. It is well known that these are eaten raw:
but after so many labours, so various and so rude, the pittance
was meagre. His biscuit was gone; but of water he had now
abundance.</p>

<p>He took advantage of the receding tide to wander among the
rocks in search of crayfish. There was extent enough of rock
to hope for a successful search.</p>

<p>But he had not reflected that he could do nothing with these
without fire to cook them. If he had taken the trouble to go to
his store-cavern, he would have found it inundated with the
rain. His wood and coal were drowned, and of his store of tow,
which served him for tinder, there was not a fibre which was not
saturated. No means remained of lighting a fire.</p>

<p>For the rest, his blower was completely disorganised. The
screen of the hearth of his forge was broken down; the storm
had sacked and devastated his workshop. With what tools and
apparatus had escaped the general wreck, he could still have
done carpentry work; but he could not have accomplished any
of the labours of the smith. Gilliatt, however, never thought of
his workshop for a moment.</p>

<p>Drawn in another direction by the pangs of hunger, he had
pursued without much reflection his search for food. He wandered,
not in the gorge of the rocks, but outside among the
smaller breakers. It was there that the Durande, ten weeks
previously, had first struck upon the sunken reef.</p>

<p>For the search that Gilliatt was prosecuting, this part was
more favourable than the interior. At low water the crabs are
accustomed to crawl out into the air. They seem to like to
warm themselves in the sun, where they swarm sometimes to
the disgust of loiterers, who recognise in these creatures, with
their awkward sidelong gait, climbing clumsily from crack to
crack the lower stages of the rocks like the steps of a staircase,
a sort of sea vermin.</p>

<p>For two months Gilliatt had lived upon these vermin of the sea.</p>

<p>On this day, however, the crayfish and crabs were both wanting.
The tempest had driven them into their solitary retreats;
and they had not yet mustered courage to venture abroad.
Gilliatt held his open knife in his hand, and from time to time
scraped a cockle from under the bunches of seaweed, which he
ate while still walking.</p>

<p>He could not have been far from the very spot where Sieur
Clubin had perished.</p>

<p>As Gilliatt was determining to content himself with the sea-urchins
and the <i>châtaignes de mer</i>, a little clattering noise at his
feet aroused his attention. A large crab, startled by his approach,
had just dropped into a pool. The water was shallow,
and he did not lose sight of it.</p>

<p>He chased the crab along the base of the rock; the crab
moved fast.</p>

<p>Suddenly it was gone.</p>

<p>It had buried itself in some crevice under the rock.</p>

<p>Gilliatt clutched the projections of the rock, and stretched
out to observe where it shelved away under the water.</p>

<p>As he suspected, there was an opening there in which the
creature had evidently taken refuge. It was more than a
crevice; it was a kind of porch.</p>

<p>The sea entered beneath it, but was not deep. The bottom
was visible, covered with large pebbles. The pebbles were
green and clothed with <i>confervæ</i>, indicating that they were
never dry. They were like the tops of a number of heads of
infants, covered with a kind of green hair.</p>

<p>Holding his knife between his teeth, Gilliatt descended, by
the help of feet and hands, from the upper part of the escarpment,
and leaped into the water. It reached almost to his
shoulders.</p>

<p>He made his way through the porch, and found himself in
a blind passage, with a roof in the form of a rude arch over his
head. The walls were polished and slippery. The crab was
nowhere visible. He gained his feet and advanced in daylight
growing fainter, so that he began to lose the power to distinguish
objects.</p>

<p>At about fifteen paces the vaulted roof ended overhead. He
had penetrated beyond the blind passage. There was here
more space, and consequently more daylight. The pupils of
his eyes, moreover, had dilated; he could see pretty clearly.
He was taken by surprise.</p>

<p>He had made his way again into the singular cavern which he
had visited in the previous month. The only difference was
that he had entered by the way of the sea.</p>

<p>It was through the submarine arch, that he had remarked
before, that he had just entered. At certain low tides it was
accessible.</p>

<p>His eyes became more accustomed to the place. His vision
became clearer and clearer. He was astonished. He found
himself again in that extraordinary palace of shadows; saw
again before his eyes that vaulted roof, those columns, those
purple and blood-like stains, that vegetation rich with gems,
and at the farther end, that crypt or sanctuary, and that altar-like
stone. He took little notice of these details, but their
impression was in his mind, and he saw that the place was
unchanged.</p>

<p>He observed before him, at a certain height in the wall, the
crevice through which he had penetrated the first time, and
which, from the point where he now stood, appeared inaccessible.</p>

<p>Near the moulded arch, he remarked those low dark grottoes,
a sort of caves within a cavern, which he had already observed
from a distance. He now stood nearer to them. The entrance
to the nearest to him was out of the water, and easily approachable.
Nearer still than this recess he noticed, above the level
of the water, and within reach of his hand, a horizontal fissure.
It seemed to him probable that the crab had taken refuge there,
and he plunged his hand in as far as he was able, and groped
about in that dusky aperture.</p>

<p>Suddenly he felt himself seized by the arm. A strange indescribable
horror thrilled through him.</p>

<p>Some living thing, thin, rough, flat, cold, slimy, had twisted
itself round his naked arm, in the dark depth below. It crept
upward towards his chest. Its pressure was like a tightening
cord, its steady persistence like that of a screw. In less than a
moment some mysterious spiral form had passed round his
wrist and elbow, and had reached his shoulder. A sharp point
penetrated beneath the armpit.</p>

<p>Gilliatt recoiled; but he had scarcely power to move! He
was, as it were, nailed to the place. With his left hand, which
was disengaged, he seized his knife, which he still held between
his teeth, and with that hand, holding the knife, he supported
himself against the rocks, while he made a desperate effort to
withdraw his arm. He succeeded only in disturbing his persecutor,
which wound itself still tighter. It was supple as leather,
strong as steel, cold as night.</p>

<p>A second form, sharp, elongated, and narrow, issued out of
the crevice, like a tongue out of monstrous jaws. It seemed
to lick his naked body. Then suddenly stretching out, it became
longer and thinner, as it crept over his skin, and wound itself
round him. At the same time a terrible sense of pain, comparable
to nothing he had ever known, compelled all his muscles
to contract. He felt upon his skin a number of flat rounded
points. It seemed as if innumerable suckers had fastened to
his flesh and were about to drink his blood.</p>

<p>A third long undulating shape issued from the hole in the
rock; seemed to feel its way about his body; lashed round his
ribs like a cord, and fixed itself there.</p>

<p>Agony when at its height is mute. Gilliatt uttered no cry.
There was sufficient light for him to see the repulsive forms
which had entangled themselves about him. A fourth ligature,
but this one swift as an arrow, darted towards his stomach, and
wound around him there.</p>

<p>It was impossible to sever or tear away the slimy bands which
were twisted tightly round his body, and were adhering by a
number of points. Each of the points was the focus of frightful
and singular pangs. It was as if numberless small mouths were
devouring him at the same time.</p>

<p>A fifth long, slimy, riband-shaped strip issued from the hole.
It passed over the others, and wound itself tightly around his
chest. The compression increased his sufferings. He could
scarcely breathe.</p>

<p>These living thongs were pointed at their extremities, but
broadened like a blade of a sword towards its hilt. All belonged
evidently to the same centre. They crept and glided
about him; he felt the strange points of pressure, which seemed
to him like mouths, change their places from time to time.</p>

<p>Suddenly a large, round, flattened, glutinous mass issued
from beneath the crevice. It was the centre; the five thongs
were attached to it like spokes to the nave of a wheel. On
the opposite side of this disgusting monster appeared the commencement
of three other tentacles, the ends of which remained
under the rock. In the middle of this slimy mass appeared
two eyes.</p>

<p>The eyes were fixed on Gilliatt.</p>

<p>He recognised the Devil-Fish.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>II</h4>

<h5>THE MONSTER</h5>


<p>It is difficult for those who have not seen it to believe in the
existence of the devil-fish.</p>

<p>Compared to this creature, the ancient hydras are insignificant.</p>

<p>At times we are tempted to imagine that the vague forms
which float in our dreams may encounter in the realm of the
Possible attractive forces, having power to fix their lineaments,
and shape living beings, out of these creatures of our slumbers.
The Unknown has power over these strange visions, and out
of them composes monsters. Orpheus, Homer, and Hesiod
imagined only the Chimera: Providence has created this terrible
creature of the sea.</p>

<p>Creation abounds in monstrous forms of life. The wherefore
of this perplexes and affrights the religious thinker.</p>

<p>If terror were the object of its creation, nothing could be
imagined more perfect than the devil-fish.</p>

<p>The whale has enormous bulk, the devil-fish is comparatively
small; the jararaca makes a hissing noise, the devil-fish is mute;
the rhinoceros has a horn, the devil-fish has none; the scorpion
has a dart, the devil-fish has no dart; the shark has sharp fins,
the devil-fish has no fins; the vespertilio-bat has wings with
claws, the devil-fish has no wings; the porcupine has his spines,
the devil-fish has no spines; the sword-fish has his sword, the
devil-fish has none; the torpedo has its electric spark, the devil-fish
has none; the toad has its poison, the devil-fish has none;
the viper has its venom, the devil-fish has no venom; the lion
has its talons, the devil-fish has no talons; the griffon has its
beak, the devil-fish has no beak; the crocodile has its jaws, the
devil-fish has no teeth.</p>

<p>The devil-fish has no muscular organisation, no menacing cry,
no breastplate, no horn, no dart, no claw, no tail with which to
hold or bruise; no cutting fins, or wings with nails, no prickles,
no sword, no electric discharge, no poison, no talons, no beak,
no teeth. Yet he is of all creatures the most formidably armed.</p>

<p>What, then, is the devil-fish? It is the sea vampire.</p>

<p>The swimmer who, attracted by the beauty of the spot,
ventures among breakers in the open sea, where the still waters
hide the splendours of the deep, or in the hollows of unfrequented
rocks, in unknown caverns abounding in sea plants,
testacea, and crustacea, under the deep portals of the ocean, runs
the risk of meeting it. If that fate should be yours, be not
curious, but fly. The intruder enters there dazzled; but quits
the spot in terror.</p>

<p>This frightful apparition, which is always possible among the
rocks in the open sea, is a greyish form which undulates in the
water. It is of the thickness of a man's arm, and in length
nearly five feet. Its outline is ragged. Its form resembles
an umbrella closed, and without handle. This irregular mass
advances slowly towards you. Suddenly it opens, and eight
radii issue abruptly from around a face with two eyes. These
radii are alive: their undulation is like lambent flames; they
resemble, when opened, the spokes of a wheel, of four or five
feet in diameter. A terrible expansion! It springs upon its
prey.</p>

<p>The devil-fish harpoons its victim.</p>

<p>It winds around the sufferer, covering and entangling him in
its long folds. Underneath it is yellow; above, a dull, earthy
hue: nothing could render that inexplicable shade dust coloured.
Its form is spider-like, but its tints are like those of the chamelion.
When irritated it becomes violet. Its most horrible
characteristic is its softness.</p>

<p>Its folds strangle, its contact paralyses.</p>

<p>It has an aspect like gangrened or scabrous flesh. It is a
monstrous embodiment of disease.</p>

<p>It adheres closely to its prey, and cannot be torn away; a
fact which is due to its power of exhausting air. The eight
antennæ, large at their roots, diminish gradually, and end in
needle-like points. Underneath each of these feelers range
two rows of pustules, decreasing in size, the largest ones near
the head, the smaller at the extremities. Each row contains
twenty-five of these. There are, therefore, fifty pustules to
each feeler, and the creature possesses in the whole four hundred.
These pustules are capable of acting like cupping-glasses.
They are cartilaginous substances, cylindrical, horny, and
livid. Upon the large species they diminish gradually from
the diameter of a five-franc piece to the size of a split pea.
These small tubes can be thrust out and withdrawn by the
animal at will. They are capable of piercing to a depth of
more than an inch.</p>

<p>This sucking apparatus has all the regularity and delicacy of
a key-board. It stands forth at one moment and disappears
the next. The most perfect sensitiveness cannot equal the
contractibility of these suckers; always proportioned to the
internal movement of the animal, and its exterior circumstances.
The monster is endowed with the qualities of the sensitive plant.</p>

<p>This animal is the same as those which mariners call Poulps;
which science designates Cephalopteræ, and which ancient
legends call Krakens. It is the English sailors who call them
"Devil-fish," and sometimes Bloodsuckers. In the Channel
Islands they are called <i>pieuvres</i>.</p>

<p>They are rare at Guernsey, very small at Jersey; but near
the island of Sark are numerous as well as very large.</p>

<p>An engraving in Sonnini's edition of Buffon represents a
Cephaloptera crushing a frigate. Denis Montfort, in fact, considers
the Poulp, or Octopod, of high latitudes, strong enough
to destroy a ship. Bory Saint Vincent doubts this; but he
shows that in our regions they will attack men. Near Brecq-Hou,
in Sark, they show a cave where a devil-fish a few years
since seized and drowned a lobster-fisher. Peron and Lamarck
are in error in their belief that the "poulp" having no fins
cannot swim. He who writes these lines has seen with his own
eyes, at Sark, in the cavern called the Boutiques, a pieuvre
swimming and pursuing a bather. When captured and killed,
this specimen was found to be four English feet broad, and it
was possible to count its four hundred suckers. The monster
thrust them out convulsively in the agony of death.</p>

<p>According to Denis Montfort, one of those observers whose
marvellous intuition sinks or raises them to the level of magicians,
the poulp is almost endowed with the passions of man: it
has its hatreds. In fact, in the Absolute to be hideous is to
hate.</p>

<p>Hideousness struggles under the natural law of elimination,
which necessarily renders it hostile.</p>

<p>When swimming, the devil-fish rests, so to speak, in its
sheath. It swims with all its parts drawn close. It may be
likened to a sleeve sewn up with a closed fist within. The
protuberance, which is the head, pushes the water aside and
advances with a vague undulatory movement. Its two eyes,
though large, are indistinct, being of the colour of the water.</p>

<p>When in ambush, or seeking its prey, it retires into itself,
grows smaller and condenses itself. It is then scarcely distinguishable
in the submarine twilight.</p>

<p>At such times, it looks like a mere ripple in the water. It
resembles anything except a living creature.</p>

<p>The devil-fish is crafty. When its victim is unsuspicious, it
opens suddenly.</p>

<p>A glutinous mass, endowed with a malignant will, what can
be more horrible?</p>

<p>It is in the most beautiful azure depths of the limpid water
that this hideous, voracious polyp delights. It always conceals
itself, a fact which increases its terrible associations.
When they are seen, it is almost invariably after they have
been captured.</p>

<p>At night, however, and particularly in the hot season, it
becomes phosphorescent. These horrible creatures have their
passions; their submarine nuptials. Then it adorns itself,
burns and illumines; and from the height of some rock, it may
be seen in the deep obscurity of the waves below, expanding
with a pale irradiation—a spectral sun.</p>

<p>The devil-fish not only swims, it walks. It is partly fish,
partly reptile. It crawls upon the bed of the sea. At these
times, it makes use of its eight feelers, and creeps along in the
fashion of a species of swift-moving caterpillar.</p>

<p>It has no blood, no bones, no flesh. It is soft and flabby; a
skin with nothing inside. Its eight tentacles may be turned
inside out like the fingers of a glove.</p>

<p>It has a single orifice in the centre of its radii, which appears
at first to be neither the vent nor the mouth. It is, in fact, both
one and the other. The orifice performs a double function.
The entire creature is cold.</p>

<p>The jelly-fish of the Mediterranean is repulsive. Contact
with that animated gelatinous substance which envelopes the
bather, in which the hands sink, and the nails scratch ineffectively;
which can be torn without killing it, and which can be
plucked off without entirely removing it—that fluid and yet
tenacious creature which slips through the fingers, is disgusting;
but no horror can equal the sudden apparition of the devil-fish,
that Medusa with its eight serpents.</p>

<p>No grasp is like the sudden strain of the cephaloptera.</p>

<p>It is with the sucking apparatus that it attacks. The victim
is oppressed by a vacuum drawing at numberless points: it is
not a clawing or a biting, but an indescribable scarification.
A tearing of the flesh is terrible, but less terrible than a sucking
of the blood. Claws are harmless compared with the horrible
action of these natural air-cups. The talons of the wild beast
enter into your flesh; but with the cephaloptera it is you who
enter into the creature. The muscles swell, the fibres of the
body are contorted, the skin cracks under the loathsome oppression,
the blood spurts out and mingles horribly with the lymph
of the monster, which clings to its victim by innumerable hideous
mouths. The hydra incorporates itself with the man; the man
becomes one with the hydra. The spectre lies upon you: the
tiger can only devour you; the devil-fish, horrible, sucks your
life-blood away. He draws you to him, and into himself;
while bound down, glued to the ground, powerless, you feel
yourself gradually emptied into this horrible pouch, which is
the monster itself.</p>

<p>These strange animals, Science, in accordance with its habit
of excessive caution even in the face of facts, at first rejects as
fabulous; then she decides to observe them; then she dissects,
classifies, catalogues, and labels; then procures specimens, and
exhibits them in glass cases in museums. They enter then into
her nomenclature; are designated mollusks, invertebrata,
radiata: she determines their position in the animal world a
little above the calamaries, a little below the cuttle-fish; she
finds for these hydras of the sea an analogous creature in fresh
water called the argyronecte: she divides them into great,
medium, and small kinds; she admits more readily the existence
of the small than of the large species, which is, however,
the tendency of science in all countries, for she is by nature more
microscopic than telescopic. She regards them from the point
of view of their construction, and calls them Cephaloptera;
counts their antennæ, and calls them Octopedes. This done,
she leaves them. Where science drops them, philosophy takes
them up.</p>

<p>Philosophy in her turn studies these creatures. She goes
both less far and further. She does not dissect, but meditate.
Where the scalpel has laboured, she plunges the hypothesis.
She seeks the final cause. Eternal perplexity of the thinker.
These creatures disturb his ideas of the Creator. They are
hideous surprises. They are the death's-head at the feast of
contemplation. The philosopher determines their characteristics
in dread. They are the concrete forms of evil. What attitude
can he take towards this treason of creation against herself?
To whom can he look for the solution of these riddles? The
Possible is a terrible matrix. Monsters are mysteries in their
concrete form. Portions of shade issue from the mass, and
something within detaches itself, rolls, floats, condenses, borrows
elements from the ambient darkness, becomes subject to unknown
polarisations, assumes a kind of life, furnishes itself
with some unimagined form from the obscurity, and with some
terrible spirit from the miasma, and wanders ghostlike among
living things. It is as if night itself assumed the forms of
animals. But for what good? with what object? Thus we
come again to the eternal questioning.</p>

<p>These animals are indeed phantoms as much as monsters.
They are proved and yet improbable. Their fate is to exist in
spite of <i>à priori</i> reasonings. They are the amphibia of the shore
which separates life from death. Their unreality makes their
existence puzzling. They touch the frontier of man's domain
and people the region of chimeras. We deny the possibility of
the vampire, and the cephaloptera appears. Their swarming
is a certainty which disconcerts our confidence. Optimism,
which is nevertheless in the right, becomes silenced in their
presence. They form the visible extremity of the dark circles.
They mark the transition of our reality into another. They
seem to belong to that commencement of terrible life which the
dreamer sees confusedly through the loophole of the night.</p>

<p>That multiplication of monsters, first in the Invisible, then in
the Possible, has been suspected, perhaps perceived by magi
and philosophers in their austere ecstasies and profound contemplations.
Hence the conjecture of a material hell. The
demon is simply the invisible tiger. The wild beast which
devours souls has been presented to the eyes of human beings
by St. John, and by Dante in his vision of Hell.</p>

<p>If, in truth, the invisible circles of creation continue indefinitely,
if after one there is yet another, and so forth in illimitable
progression; if that chain, which for our part we are
resolved to doubt, really exist, the cephaloptera at one extremity
proves Satan at the other. It is certain that the wrongdoer
at one end proves the existence of wrong at the other.</p>

<p>Every malignant creature, like every perverted intelligence,
is a sphinx. A terrible sphinx propounding a terrible riddle;
the riddle of the existence of Evil.</p>

<p>It is this perfection of evil which has sometimes sufficed to
incline powerful intellects to a faith in the duality of the Deity,
towards that terrible bifrons of the Manichæans.</p>

<p>A piece of silk stolen during the last war from the palace of
the Emperor of China represents a shark eating a crocodile, who
is eating a serpent, who is devouring an eagle, who is preying on
a swallow, who in his turn is eating a caterpillar.</p>

<p>All nature which is under our observation is thus alternately
devouring and devoured. The prey prey on each other.</p>

<p>Learned men, however, who are also philosophers, and therefore
optimists in their view of creation, find, or believe they
find, an explanation. Among others, Bonnet of Geneva, that
mysterious exact thinker, who was opposed to Buffon, as in
later times Geoffrey St. Hilaire has been to Cuvier, was struck
with the idea of the final object. His notions may be summed
up thus: universal death necessitates universal sepulture; the
devourers are the sextons of the system of nature. All created
things enter into and form the elements of other. To decay is
to nourish. Such is the terrible law from which not even man
himself escapes.</p>

<p>In our world of twilight this fatal order of things produces
monsters. You ask for what purpose. We find the solution
here.</p>

<p>But <i>is</i> this the solution? Is this the answer to our questionings?
And if so, why not some different order of things?
Thus the question returns.</p>

<p>Let us live: be it so.</p>

<p>But let us endeavour that death shall be progress. Let us
aspire to an existence in which these mysteries shall be made
clear. Let us follow that conscience which leads us thither.</p>

<p>For let us never forget that the highest is only attained
through the high.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>III</h4>

<h5>ANOTHER KIND OF SEA-COMBAT</h5>


<p>Such was the creature in whose power Gilliatt had fallen for
some minutes.</p>

<p>The monster was the inhabitant of the grotto; the terrible
genii of the place. A kind of sombre demon of the water.</p>

<p>All the splendours of the cavern existed for it alone.</p>

<p>On the day of the previous month when Gilliatt had first
penetrated into the grotto, the dark outline, vaguely perceived
by him in the ripples of the secret waters, was this monster. It
was here in its home.</p>

<p>When entering for the second time into the cavern in pursuit
of the crab, he had observed the crevice in which he supposed
that the crab had taken refuge, the pieuvre was there lying in
wait for prey.</p>

<p>Is it possible to imagine that secret ambush?</p>

<p>No bird would brood, no egg would burst to life, no flower
would dare to open, no breast to give milk, no heart to love,
no spirit to soar, under the influence of that apparition of evil
watching with sinister patience in the dusk.</p>

<p>Gilliatt had thrust his arm deep into the opening; the monster
had snapped at it. It held him fast, as the spider holds the fly.</p>

<p>He was in the water up to his belt; his naked feet clutching
the slippery roundness of the huge stones at the bottom; his
right arm bound and rendered powerless by the flat coils of the
long tentacles of the creature, and his body almost hidden under
the folds and cross folds of this horrible bandage.</p>

<p>Of the eight arms of the devil-fish three adhered to the rock,
while five encircled Gilliatt. In this way, clinging to the granite
on the one hand, and with the other to its human prey, it enchained
him to the rock. Two hundred and fifty suckers were
upon him, tormenting him with agony and loathing. He was
grasped by gigantic hands, the fingers of which were each nearly
a yard long, and furnished inside with living blisters eating into
the flesh.</p>

<p>As we have said, it is impossible to tear oneself from the folds
of the devil-fish. The attempt ends only in a firmer grasp.
The monster clings with more determined force. Its effort
increases with that of its victim; every struggle produces a
tightening of its ligatures.</p>

<p>Gilliatt had but one resource, his knife.</p>

<p>His left hand only was free; but the reader knows with what
power he could use it. It might have been said that he had
two right hands.</p>

<p>His open knife was in his hand.</p>

<p>The antenna of the devil-fish cannot be cut; it is a leathery
substance impossible to divide with the knife, it slips under the
edge; its position in attack also is such that to cut it would be
to wound the victim's own flesh.</p>

<p>The creature is formidable, but there is a way of resisting it.
The fishermen of Sark know this, as does any one who has seen
them execute certain movements in the sea. The porpoises
know it also; they have a way of biting the cuttle-fish which
decapitates it. Hence the frequent sight on the sea of pen-fish,
poulps, and cuttle-fish without heads.</p>

<p>The cephaloptera, in fact, is only vulnerable through the
head.</p>

<p>Gilliatt was not ignorant of this fact.</p>

<p>He had never seen a devil-fish of this size. His first encounter
was with one of the larger species. Another would have been
powerless with terror.</p>

<p>With the devil-fish, as with a furious bull, there is a certain
moment in the conflict which must be seized. It is the instant
when the bull lowers the neck; it is the instant when the devil-fish
advances its head. The movement is rapid. He who loses
that moment is destroyed.</p>

<p>The things we have described occupied only a few moments.
Gilliatt, however, felt the increasing power of its innumerable
suckers.</p>

<p>The monster is cunning; it tries first to stupefy its prey. It
seizes and then pauses awhile.</p>

<p>Gilliatt grasped his knife; the sucking increased.</p>

<p>He looked at the monster, which seemed to look at him.</p>

<p>Suddenly it loosened from the rock its sixth antenna, and
darting it at him, seized him by the left arm.</p>

<p>At the same moment it advanced its head with a violent
movement. In one second more its mouth would have fastened
on his breast. Bleeding in the sides, and with his two arms
entangled, he would have been a dead man.</p>

<p>But Gillian was watchful. He avoided the antenna, and at
the moment when the monster darted forward to fasten on his
breast, he struck it with the knife clenched in his left hand.
There were two convulsions in opposite directions; that of the
devil-fish and that of its prey. The movement was rapid as a
double flash of lightnings.</p>

<p>He had plunged the blade of his knife into the flat slimy substance,
and by a rapid movement, like the flourish of a whip in
the air, describing a circle round the two eyes, he wrenched the
head off as a man would draw a tooth.</p>

<p>The struggle was ended. The folds relaxed. The monster
dropped away, like the slow detaching of bands. The four
hundred suckers, deprived of their sustaining power, dropped
at once from the man and the rock. The mass sank to the
bottom of the water.</p>

<p>Breathless with the struggle, Gilliatt could perceive upon the
stones at his feet two shapeless, slimy heaps, the head on one
side, the remainder of the monster on the other.</p>

<p>Fearing, nevertheless, some convulsive return of his agony,
he recoiled to avoid the reach of the dreaded tentacles.</p>

<p>But the monster was quite dead.</p>

<p>Gilliatt closed his knife.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>IV</h4>

<h5>NOTHING IS HIDDEN, NOTHING LOST</h5>


<p>It was time that he killed the devil-fish. He was almost
suffocated. His right arm and his chest were purple. Numberless
little swellings were distinguishable upon them; the
blood flowed from them here and there. The remedy for these
wounds is sea-water. Gilliatt plunged into it, rubbing himself
at the same time with the palms of his hands. The swellings
disappeared under the friction.</p>

<p>By stepping further into the waters he had, without perceiving,
approached to the species of recess already observed by
him near the crevice where he had been attacked by the devil-fish.</p>

<p>This recess stretched obliquely under the great walls of the
cavern, and was dry. The large pebbles which had become
heaped up there had raised the bottom above the level of
ordinary tides. The entrance was a rather large elliptical arch;
a man could enter by stooping. The green light of the submarine
grotto penetrated into it and lighted it feebly.</p>

<p>It happened that, while hastily rubbing his skin, Gilliatt
raised his eyes mechanically.</p>

<p>He was able to see far into the cavern.</p>

<p>He shuddered.</p>

<p>He fancied that he perceived, in the furthest depth of the
dusky recess, something smiling.</p>

<p>Gilliatt had never heard the word "hallucination," but he
was familiar with the idea. Those mysterious encounters with
the invisible, which, for the sake of avoiding the difficulty of
explaining them, we call hallucinations, are in nature. Illusions
or realities, visions are a fact. He who has the gift will see
them. Gilliatt, as we have said, was a dreamer. He had, at
times, the faculty of a seer. It was not in vain that he had spent
his days in musing among solitary places.</p>

<p>He imagined himself the dupe of one of those mirages which
he had more than once beheld when in his dreamy moods.</p>

<p>The opening was somewhat in the shape of a chalk-burner's
oven. It was a low niche with projections like basket-handles.
Its abrupt groins contracted gradually as far as the extremity
of the crypt, where the heaps of round stones and the rocky
roof joined.</p>

<p>Gilliatt entered, and lowering his head, advanced towards the
object in the distance.</p>

<p>There was indeed something smiling.</p>

<p>It was a death's head; but it was not only the head. There
was the entire skeleton. A complete human skeleton was lying
in the cavern.</p>

<p>In such a position a bold man will continue his researches.</p>

<p>Gilliatt cast his eyes around. He was surrounded by a multitude
of crabs. The multitude did not stir. They were but
empty shells.</p>

<p>These groups were scattered here and there among the masses
of pebbles in irregular constellations.</p>

<p>Gilliatt, having his eyes fixed elsewhere, had walked among
them without perceiving them.</p>

<p>At this extremity of the crypt, where he had now penetrated,
there was a still greater heap of remains. It was a confused
mass of legs, antennæ, and mandibles. Claws stood wide open;
bony shells lay still under their bristling prickles; some reversed
showed their livid hollows. The heap was like a <i>mêlée</i> of besiegers
who had fallen, and lay massed together.</p>

<p>The skeleton was partly buried in this heap.</p>

<p>Under this confused mass of scales and tentacles, the eye perceived
the cranium with its furrows, the vertebræ, the thigh
bones, the tibias, and the long-jointed finger bones with their
nails. The frame of the ribs was filled with crabs. Some heart
had once beat there. The green mould of the sea had settled
round the sockets of the eyes. Limpets had left their slime upon
the bony nostrils. For the rest, there were not in this cave
within the rocks either sea-gulls, or weeds, or a breath of air.
All was still. The teeth grinned.</p>

<p>The sombre side of laughter is that strange mockery of expression
which is peculiar to a human skull.</p>

<p>This marvellous palace of the deep, inlaid and incrusted with
all the gems of the sea, had at length revealed and told its
secret. It was a savage haunt; the devil-fish inhabited it; it
was also a tomb, in which the body of a man reposed.</p>

<p>The skeleton and the creatures around it oscillated vaguely
in the reflections of the subterranean water which trembled
upon the roof and wall. The horrible multitude of crabs looked
as if finishing their repast. These crustacea seemed to be
devouring the carcase. Nothing could be more strange than
the aspect of the dead vermin upon their dead prey.</p>

<p>Gilliatt had beneath his eyes the storehouse of the devil-fish.</p>

<p>It was a dismal sight. The crabs had devoured the man: the
devil-fish had devoured the crabs.</p>

<p>There were no remains of clothing anywhere visible. The
man must have been seized naked.</p>

<p>Gilliatt, attentively examining, began to remove the shells
from the skeleton. What had this man been? The body was
admirably dissected; it looked as if prepared for the study of
anatomy; all the flesh was stripped; not a muscle remained;
not a bone was missing. If Gilliatt had been learned in science,
he might have demonstrated the fact. The periostea, denuded
of their covering, were white and smooth, as if they had been
polished. But for some green mould of sea-mosses here and
there, they would have been like ivory. The cartilaginous
divisions were delicately inlaid and arranged. The tomb sometimes
produces this dismal mosaic work.</p>

<p>The body was, as it were, interred under the heap of dead
crabs. Gilliatt disinterred it.</p>

<p>Suddenly he stooped, and examined more closely.</p>

<p>He had perceived around the vertebral column a sort of belt.</p>

<p>It was a leathern girdle, which had evidently been worn
buckled upon the waist of the man when alive.</p>

<p>The leather was moist; the buckle rusty.</p>

<p>Gilliatt pulled the girdle; the vertebra of the skeleton resisted,
and he was compelled to break through them in order to
remove it. A crust of small shells had begun to form upon it.</p>

<p>He felt it, and found a hard substance within, apparently of
square form. It was useless to endeavour to unfasten the buckle,
so he cut the leather with his knife.</p>

<p>The girdle contained a little iron box and some pieces of gold.
Gilliatt counted twenty guineas.</p>

<p>The iron box was an old sailor's tobacco-box, opening and
shutting with a spring. It was very tight and rusty. The
spring being completely oxidised would not work.</p>

<p>Once more the knife served Gilliatt in a difficulty. A pressure
with the point of the blade caused the lid to fly up.</p>

<p>The box was open.</p>

<p>There was nothing inside but pieces of paper.</p>

<p>A little roll of very thin sheets, folded in four, was fitted in
the bottom of the box. They were damp, but not injured.
The box, hermetically sealed, had preserved them. Gilliatt
unfolded them.</p>

<p>They were three bank-notes of one thousand pounds sterling
each; making together seventy-five thousand francs.</p>

<p>Gilliatt folded them again, replaced them in the box, taking
advantage of the space which remained to add the twenty
guineas; and then reclosed the box as well as he could.</p>

<p>Next he examined the girdle.</p>

<p>The leather, which had originally been polished outside, was
rough within. Upon this tawny ground some letters had been
traced in black thick ink. Gilliatt deciphered them, and read
the words, "Sieur Clubin."</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>V</h4>

<h5>THE FATAL DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SIX INCHES AND TWO FEET</h5>


<p>Gilliatt replaced the box in the girdle, and placed the girdle
in the pocket of his trousers.</p>

<p>He left the skeleton among the crabs, with the remains of
the devil-fish beside it.</p>

<p>While he had been occupied with the devil-fish and the
skeleton, the rising tide had submerged the entrance to the
cave. He was only enabled to leave it by plunging under the
arched entrance. He got through without difficulty; for he
knew the entrance well, and was master of these gymnastics in
the sea.</p>

<p>It is easy to understand the drama which had taken place
there during the ten weeks preceding. One monster had preyed
upon another; the devil-fish had seized Clubin.</p>

<p>These two embodiments of treachery had met in the inexorable
darkness. There had been an encounter at the bottom of
the sea between these two compounds of mystery and watchfulness;
the monster had destroyed the man: a horrible fulfilment
of justice.</p>

<p>The crab feeds on carrion, the devil-fish on crabs. The
devil-fish seizes as it passes any swimming animal—an otter, a
dog, a man if it can—sucks the blood, and leaves the body at
the bottom of the water. The crabs are the spider-formed
scavengers of the sea. Putrefying flesh attracts them; they
crowd round it, devour the body, and are in their turn consumed
by the devil-fish. Dead creatures disappear in the crab, the
crab disappears in the pieuvre. This is the law which we have
already pointed out.</p>

<p>The devil-fish had laid hold of him, and drowned him. Some
wave had carried his body into the cave, and deposited it at the
extremity of the inner cavern, where Gilliatt had discovered it.</p>

<p>He returned searching among the rocks for sea-urchins and
limpets. He had no desire for crabs; to have eaten them now
would have seemed to him like feeding upon human flesh.</p>

<p>For the rest, he thought of nothing but of eating what he
could before starting. Nothing now interposed to prevent his
departure. Great tempests are always followed by a calm,
which lasts sometimes several days. There was, therefore, no
danger from the sea. Gilliatt had resolved to leave the rocks
on the following day. It was important, on account of the tide,
to keep the barrier between the two Douvres during the night,
but he intended to remove it at daybreak, to push the sloop out
to sea, and set sail for St. Sampson. The light breeze which
was blowing came from the south-west, which was precisely the
wind which he would want.</p>

<p>It was in the first quarter of the moon, in the month of May;
the days were long.</p>

<p>When Gilliatt, having finished his wanderings among the
rocks, and appeased his appetite to some extent, returned to
the passage between the two Douvres, where he had left the
sloop, the sun had set, the twilight was increased by that pale
light which comes from a crescent moon; the tide had attained
its height, and was beginning to ebb. The funnel standing
upright above the sloop had been covered by the foam during
the tempest with a coating of salt which glittered white in the
light of the moon.</p>

<p>This circumstance reminded Gilliatt that the storm had
inundated the sloop, both with surf and rain-water, and that if
he meant to start in the morning, it would be necessary to bail
it out.</p>

<p>Before leaving to go in quest of crabs, he had ascertained that
it had about six inches of water in the hold. The scoop which
he used for the purpose would, he thought, be sufficient for
throwing the water overboard.</p>

<p>On arriving at the barrier, Gilliatt was struck with terror.
There were nearly two feet of water in the sloop. A terrible
discovery; the bark had sprung a leak.</p>

<p>She had been making water gradually during his absence.
Burdened as she was, two feet of water was a perilous addition.
A little more, and she must inevitably founder. If he had
returned but an hour later, he would probably have found
nothing above water but the funnel and the mast.</p>

<p>There was not a minute to be lost in deliberation. It was
absolutely necessary to find the leakage, stop it, and then
empty the vessel, or at all events, lighten it. The pumps of
the Durande had been lost in the break-up of the wreck. He
was reduced to use the scoop of the bark.</p>

<p>To find the leak was the most urgent necessity.</p>

<p>Gilliatt set to work immediately, and without even giving
himself time to dress. He shivered; but he no longer felt
either hunger or cold.</p>

<p>The water continued to gain upon his vessel. Fortunately
there was no wind. The slightest swell would have been fatal.</p>

<p>The moon went down.</p>

<p>Bent low, and plunged in the water deeper than his waist he
groped about for a long time. He discovered the mischief at
last.</p>

<p>During the gale, at the critical moment when the sloop had
swerved, the strong bark had bumped and grazed rather
violently on the rocks. One of the projections of the Little
Douvre had made a fracture in the starboard side of the hull.</p>

<p>The leak unluckily—it might almost have been said, maliciously—had
been made near the joint of the two riders, a fact
which, joined with the fury of the hurricane, had prevented
him perceiving it during his dark and rapid survey in the height
of the storm.</p>

<p>The fracture was alarming on account of its size; but fortunately,
although the vessel was sunk lower than usual by the
weight of water, it was still above the ordinary water-line.</p>

<p>At the moment when the accident had occurred, the waves
had rolled heavily into the defile, and had flooded through the
breach; and the vessel had sunk a few inches under the additional
weight, so that, even after the subsidence of the water, the
weight having raised the water-line, had kept the hole still
under the surface. Hence the imminence of the danger. But
if he could succeed in stopping the leak, he could empty the
sloop; the hole once staunched, the vessel would rise to its
usual water-line, the fracture would be above water, and in this
position the repair would be easy, or at least possible. He had
still, as we have already said, his carpenters' tools in good
condition.</p>

<p>But meanwhile what uncertainty must he not endure!
What perils, what chances of accidents! He heard the water
rising inexorably. One shock, and all would have perished.
What misery seemed in store for him. Perhaps his endeavours
were even now too late.</p>

<p>He reproached himself bitterly. He thought that he ought
to have seen the damage immediately. The six inches of
water in the hold ought to have suggested it to him. He had
been stupid enough to attribute these six inches of water to
the rain and the foam. He was angry with himself for having
slept and eaten; he taxed himself even with his weariness, and
almost with the storm and the dark night. All seemed to him
to have been his own fault.</p>

<p>These bitter self-reproaches filled his mind while engaged in
his labour, but they did not prevent his considering well the
work he was engaged in.</p>

<p>The leak had been found; that was the first step: to staunch
it was the second. That was all that was possible for the
moment. Joinery work cannot be carried on under water.</p>

<p>It was a favourable circumstance that the breach in the hull
was in the space between the two chains which held the funnel
fast on the starboard side. The stuffing with which it was
necessary to stop it could be fixed to these chains.</p>

<p>The water meanwhile was gaining. Its depth was now
between two and three feet; and it reached above his knees.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VI</h4>

<h5>DE PROFUNDIS AD ALTUM</h5>


<p>Gilliatt had to his hand among his reserve of rigging for the
sloop a pretty large tarpaulin, furnished with long laniards at
the four corners.</p>

<p>He took this tarpaulin, made fast the two corners by the
laniards to the two rings of the chains of the funnel on the same
side as the leak, and threw it over the gunwale. The tarpaulin
hung like a sheet between the Little Douvre and the bark, and
sunk in the water. The pressure of the water endeavouring to
enter into the hold, kept it close to the hull upon the gap. The
heavier the pressure the closer the sail adhered. It was stuck
by the water itself right upon the fracture. The wound of the
bark was staunched.</p>

<p>The tarred canvas formed an effectual barrier between the
interior of the hold and the waves without. Not a drop of
water entered. The leak was masked, but was not stopped.
It was a respite only.</p>

<p>Gilliatt took the scoop and began to bale the sloop. It was
time that she were lightened. The labour warmed him a little,
but his weariness was extreme. He was forced to acknowledge
to himself that he could not complete the work of staunching
the hold. He had scarcely eaten anything, and he had the
humiliation of feeling himself exhausted.</p>

<p>He measured the progress of his work by the sinking of the
level of water below his knees. The fall was slow.</p>

<p>Moreover, the leakage was only interrupted; the evil was
moderated, not repaired. The tarpaulin pushed into the gap
began to bulge inside; looking as if a fist were under the canvas,
endeavouring to force it through. The canvas, strong and
pitchy, resisted; but the swelling and the tension increased; it
was not certain that it would not give way, and at any moment
the swelling might become a rent. The irruption of water must
then recommence.</p>

<p>In such a case, as the crews of vessels in distress know well,
there is no other remedy than stuffing. The sailors take rags
of every kind which they can find at hand, everything, in fact,
which in their language is called "service;" and with this they
push the bulging sail-cloth as far as they can into the leak.</p>

<p>Of this "service," Gilliatt had none. All the rags and tow
which he had stored up had been used in his operations, or
carried away by the storm.</p>

<p>If necessary, he might possibly have been able to find some
remains by searching among the rocks. The sloop was sufficiently
lightened for him to leave it with safety for a quarter of
an hour; but how could he make this search without a light?
The darkness was complete. There was no longer any moon;
nothing but the starry sky. He had no dry tow with which to
make a match, no tallow to make a candle, no fire to light one,
no lantern to shelter it from the wind. In the sloop and among
the rocks all was confused and indistinct. He could hear the
water lapping against the wounded hull, but he could not even
see the crack. It was with his hands that he had ascertained
the bulging of the tarpaulin. In that darkness it was impossible
to make any useful search for rags of canvas or pieces of
tow scattered among the breakers. Who could glean these
waifs and strays without being able to see his path? Gilliatt
looked sorrowfully at the sky; all those stars, he thought, and
yet no light!</p>

<p>The water in the bark having diminished, the pressure from
without increased. The bulging of the canvas became larger,
and was still increasing, like a frightful abscess ready to burst.
The situation, which had been improved for a short time, began
to be threatening.</p>

<p>Some means of stopping it effectually was absolutely necessary.
He had nothing left but his clothes, which he had
stretched to dry upon the projecting rocks of the Little Douvre.</p>

<p>He hastened to fetch them, and placed them upon the gunwale
of the sloop.</p>

<p>Then he took his tarpaulin overcoat, and kneeling in the
water, thrust it into the crevice, and pushing the swelling of the
sail outward, emptied it of water. To the tarpaulin coat he
added the sheepskin, then his Guernsey shirt, and then his
jacket. The hole received them all. He had nothing left but
his sailor's trousers, which he took off, and pushed in with the
other articles. This enlarged and strengthened the stuffing.</p>

<p>The stopper was made, and it appeared to be sufficient.</p>

<p>These clothes passed partly through the gap, the sail-cloth
outside enveloping them. The sea making an effort to enter,
pressed against the obstacle, spread it over the gap, and blocked
it. It was a sort of exterior compression.</p>

<p>Inside, the centre only of the bulging having been driven
out, there remained all around the gap and the stuffing just
thrust through a sort of circular pad formed by the tarpaulin,
which was rendered still firmer by the irregularities of the fracture
with which it had become entangled.</p>

<p>The leak was staunched, but nothing could be more precarious.
Those sharp splinters of the gap which fixed the tarpaulin
might pierce it and make holes, by which the water would
enter; while he would not even perceive it in the darkness.
There was little probability of the stoppage lasting until daylight.
Gilliatt's anxiety changed its form; but he felt it increasing
at the same time that he found his strength leaving
him.</p>

<p>He had again set to work to bale out the hold, but his arms,
in spite of all his efforts, could scarcely lift a scoopfull of water.
He was naked and shivering. He felt as if the end were now at
hand.</p>

<p>One possible chance flashed across his mind. There might
be a sail in sight. A fishing-boat which should by any accident
be in the neighbourhood of the Douvres, might come to his
assistance. The moment had arrived when a helpmate was
absolutely necessary. With a man and a lantern all might yet
be saved. If there were two persons, one might easily bale the
vessel. Since the leak was temporarily staunched, as soon as
she could be relieved of this burden, she would rise, and regain
her ordinary water-line. The leak would then be above the
surface of the water, the repairs would be practicable, and he
would be able immediately to replace the stuff by a piece of
planking, and thus substitute for the temporary stoppage a
complete repair. If not, it would be necessary to wait till daylight—to
wait the whole night long; a delay which might prove
ruinous. If by chance some ship's lantern should be in sight,
Gilliatt would be able to signal it from the height of the Great
Douvre. The weather was calm, there was no wind or rolling
sea; there was a possibility of the figure of a man being observed
moving against the background of the starry sky. A captain of
a ship, or even the master of a fishing-boat, would not be at
night in the waters of the Douvres without directing his glass
upon the rock, by way of precaution.</p>

<p>Gilliatt hoped that some one might perceive him.</p>

<p>He climbed upon the wreck, grasped the knotted rope, and
mounted upon the Great Douvre.</p>

<p>Not a sail was visible around the horizon; not a boat's
lantern. The wide expanse, as far as eye could reach, was a
desert. No assistance was possible, and no resistance possible.</p>

<p>Gilliatt felt himself without resources; a feeling which he
had not felt until then.</p>

<p>A dark fatality was now his master. With all his labour, all
his success, all his courage, he and his bark, and its precious
burden, were about to become the sport of the waves. He had
no other means of continuing the struggle; he became listless.
How could he prevent the tide from returning, the water from
rising, the night from continuing? The temporary stoppage
which he had made was his sole reliance. He had exhausted
and stripped himself in constructing and completing it; he
could neither fortify nor add to it. The stopgap was such that
it must remain as it was; and every further effort was useless.
The apparatus, hastily constructed, was at the mercy of the
waves. How would this inert obstacle work? It was this
obstacle now, not Gilliatt, which had to sustain the combat,
that handfull of rags, not that intelligence. The swell of a wave
would suffice to re-open the fracture. More or less of pressure;
the whole question was comprised in that formula.</p>

<p>All depended upon a brute struggle between two mechanical
quantities. Henceforth he could neither aid his auxiliary, nor
stop his enemy. He was no longer any other than a mere spectator
of this struggle, which was one for him of life or death. He
who had ruled over it, a supreme intelligence, was at the last
moment compelled to resign all to a mere blind resistance.</p>

<p>No trial, no terror that he had yet undergone, could bear
comparison with this.</p>

<p>From the time when he had taken up his abode upon the
Douvres, he had found himself environed, and, as it were,
possessed by solitude. This solitude more than surrounded, it
enveloped him. A thousand menaces at once had met him face
to face. The wind was always there, ready to become furious;
the sea, ready to roar. There was no stopping that terrible
mouth the wind, no imprisoning that dread monster the sea.
And yet he had striven, he, a solitary man, had combated hand
to hand with the ocean, had wrestled even with the tempest.</p>

<p>Many other anxieties, many other necessities had he made
head against. There was no form of distress with which he had
not become familiar. He had been compelled to execute great
works without tools, to move vast burdens without aid, without
science to resolve problems, without provisions to find food,
without bed or roof to cover it, to find shelter and sleep.</p>

<p>Upon that solitary rock he had been subjected by turns to all
the varied and cruel tortures of nature; oftentimes a gentle
mother, not less often a pitiless destroyer.</p>

<p>He had conquered his isolation, conquered hunger, conquered
thirst, conquered cold, conquered fever, conquered labour, conquered
sleep. He had encountered a mighty coalition of
obstacles formed to bar his progress. After his privations there
were the elements; after the sea the tempest, after the tempest
the devil-fish, after the monster the spectre.</p>

<p>A dismal irony was then the end of all. Upon this rock,
whence he had thought to arise triumphant, the spectre of
Clubin had only arisen to mock him with a hideous smile.</p>

<p>The grin of the spectre was well founded. Gilliatt saw himself
ruined; saw himself no less than Clubin in the grasp of death.</p>

<p>Winter, famine, fatigue, the dismemberment of the wreck,
the removal of the machinery, the equinoctial gale, the thunder,
the monster, were all as nothing compared with this small
fracture in a vessel's planks. Against the cold one could
procure—and he had procured—fire; against hunger, the shell-fish
of the rocks; against thirst, the rain; against the difficulties
of his great task, industry and energy; against the sea and the
storm, the breakwater; against the devil-fish, the knife; but
against the terrible leak he had no weapon.</p>

<p>The hurricane had bequeathed him this sinister farewell.
The last struggle, the traitorous thrust, the treacherous side
blow of the vanquished foe. In its flight the tempest had
turned and shot this arrow in the rear. It was the final and
deadly stab of his antagonist.</p>

<p>It was possible to combat with the tempest, but how could he
struggle with that insidious enemy who now attacked him.</p>

<p>If the stoppage gave way, if the leak re-opened, nothing could
prevent the sloop foundering. It would be the bursting of the
ligature of the artery; and once under the water with its heavy
burden, no power could raise it. The noble struggle, with two
months' Titanic labour, ended then in annihilation. To recommence
would be impossible. He had neither forge nor materials.
At daylight, in all probability, he was about to see all his work
sink slowly and irrecoverably into the gulf. Terrible, to feel
that sombre power beneath. The sea snatched his prize from
his hands.</p>

<p>With his bark engulfed, no fate awaited him but to perish
of hunger and cold, like the poor shipwrecked sailor on "The
Man Rock."</p>

<p>During two long months the intelligences which hover invisibly
over the world had been the spectators of these things;
on one hand the wide expanse, the waves, the winds, the lightnings,
the meteors; on the other a man. On one hand the sea,
on the other a human mind; on the one hand the infinite, on
the other an atom.</p>

<p>The battle had been fierce, and behold the abortive issue of
these prodigies of valour.</p>

<p>Thus did this heroism without parallel end in powerlessness;
thus ended in despair that formidable struggle; that struggle
of a nothing against all; that Iliad against one.</p>

<p>Gilliatt gazed wildly into space.</p>

<p>He had no clothing. He stood naked in the midst of that
immensity.</p>

<p>Then overwhelmed by the sense of that unknown infinity,
like one bewildered by a strange persecution, confronting the
shadows of night, in the presence of that impenetrable darkness,
in the midst of the murmur of the waves, the swell, the foam,
the breeze, under the clouds, under that vast diffusion of force,
under that mysterious firmament of wings, of stars, of gulfs,
having around him and beneath him the ocean, above him the
constellations, under the great unfathomable deep, he sank,
gave up the struggle, lay down upon the rock, his face towards
the stars, humbled, and uplifting his joined hands towards the
terrible depths, he cried aloud, "Have mercy."</p>

<p>Weighed down to earth by that immensity, he prayed.</p>

<p>He was there alone, in the darkness upon the rock, in the
midst of that sea, stricken down with exhaustion like one
smitten by lightning, naked like the gladiator in the circus, save
that for circus he had the vast horizon, instead of wild beasts
the shadows of darkness, instead of the faces of the crowd the
eyes of the Unknown, instead of the Vestals the stars, instead of
Cæsar the All-powerful.</p>

<p>His whole being seemed to dissolve in cold, fatigue, powerlessness,
prayer, and darkness, and his eyes closed.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VII</h4>

<h5>THE APPEAL IS HEARD</h5>


<p>Some hours passed.</p>

<p>The sun rose in an unclouded sky.</p>

<p>Its first ray shone upon a motionless form upon the Great
Douvre. It was Gilliatt.</p>

<p>He was still outstretched upon the rock.</p>

<p>He was naked, cold, and stiff; but he did not shiver. His
closed eyelids were wan. It would have been difficult for a
beholder to say whether the form before him was not a corpse.</p>

<p>The sun seemed to look upon him.</p>

<p>If he were not dead, he was already so near death that the
slightest cold wind would have sufficed to extinguish life.</p>

<p>The wind began to breathe, warm and animating: it was the
opening breath of May.</p>

<p>Meanwhile the sun ascended in the deep blue sky; its rays,
less horizontal, flushed the sky. Its light became warmth.
It enveloped the slumbering form.</p>

<p>Gilliatt moved not. If he breathed, it was only that feeble
respiration which could scarcely tarnish the surface of a mirror.</p>

<p>The sun continued its ascent; its rays striking less and less
obliquely upon the naked man. The gentle breeze which had
been merely tepid became hot.</p>

<p>The rigid and naked body remained still without movement;
but the skin seemed less livid.</p>

<p>The sun, approaching the zenith, shone almost perpendicularly
upon the plateau of the Douvres. A flood of light descended
from the heavens; the vast reflection from the glassy
sea increased its splendour: the rock itself imbibed the rays
and warmed the sleeper.</p>

<p>A sigh raised his breast.</p>

<p>He lived.</p>

<p>The sun continued its gentle offices. The wind, which was
already the breath of summer and of noon, approached him like
loving lips that breathed upon him softly.</p>

<p>Gilliatt moved.</p>

<p>The peaceful calm upon the sea was perfect. Its murmur
was like the droning of the nurse beside the sleeping infant.
The rock seemed cradled in the waves.</p>

<p>The sea-birds, who knew that form, fluttered above it; not
with their old wild astonishment, but with a sort of fraternal
tenderness. They uttered plaintive cries: they seemed to be
calling to him. A sea-mew, who no doubt knew him, was tame
enough to come near him. It began to caw as if speaking to
him. The sleeper seemed not to hear. The bird hopped upon
his shoulder, and pecked his lips softly.</p>

<p>Gilliatt opened his eyes.</p>

<p>The birds dispersed, chattering wildly.</p>

<p>Gilliatt arose, stretched himself like a roused lion, ran to the
edge of the platform, and looked down into the space between
the two Douvres.</p>

<p>The sloop was there, intact; the stoppage had held out; the
sea had probably disturbed it but little.</p>

<p>All was saved.</p>

<p>He was no longer weary. His powers had returned. His
swoon had ended in a deep sleep.</p>

<p>He descended and baled out the sloop, emptied the hold,
raised the leakage above the water-line, dressed himself, ate,
drank some water, and was joyful.</p>

<p>The gap in the side of his vessel, examined in broad daylight,
proved to require more labour than he had thought. It was a
serious fracture. The entire day was not too much for its
repair.</p>

<p>At daybreak on the morrow, after removing the barrier and
re-opening the entrance to the defile, dressed in the tattered
clothing which had served to stop the leak, having about him
Clubin's girdle and the seventy-five thousand francs, standing
erect in the sloop, now repaired, by the side of the machinery
which he had rescued, with a favourable breeze and a good
sea, Gilliatt pushed off from the Douvres.</p>

<p>He put the sloop's head for Guernsey.</p>

<p>At the moment of his departure from the rocks, any one who
had been there might have heard him singing, in an undertone,
the air of "Bonnie Dundee."</p>
