<h4>I</h4>

<h5>STREAKS OF FIRE ON THE HORIZON</h5>


<p>Gilliatt had never spoken to Déruchette; he knew her from
having seen her at a distance, as men know the morning star.</p>

<p>At the period when Déruchette had met Gilliatt on the road
leading from St. Peter's Port to Vale, and had surprised him by
tracing his name in the snow, she was just sixteen years of age.
Only the evening before Mess Lethierry had said to her, "Come,
no more childish tricks; you are a great girl."</p>

<p>That word "Gilliatt," written by the young maiden, had sunk
into an unfathomed depth.</p>

<p>What were women to Gilliatt? He could not have answered
that question himself. When he met one he generally inspired
her with something of the timidity which he felt himself. He
never spoke to a woman except from urgent necessity. He had
never played the part of a "gallant" to any one of the country
girls. When he found himself alone on the road, and perceived
a woman coming towards him, he would climb over a fence, or
bury himself in some copse: he even avoided old women.
Once in his life he had seen a Parisian lady. A <i>Parisienne</i> on
the wing was a strange event in Guernsey at that distant epoch;
and Gilliatt had heard this gentle lady relate her little troubles
in these words: "I am very much annoyed; I have got some
spots of rain upon my bonnet. Pale buff is a shocking colour
for rain." Having found, some time afterwards, between the
leaves of a book, an old engraving, representing "a lady of the
Chaussée d'Antin" in full dress, he had stuck it against the wall
at home as a souvenir of this remarkable apparition.</p>

<p>On that Christmas morning when he had met Déruchette,
and when she had written his name and disappeared laughing,
he returned home, scarcely conscious of why he had gone out.
That night he slept little; he was dreaming of a thousand
things: that it would be well to cultivate black radishes in the
garden; that he had not seen the boat from Sark pass by; had
anything happened to it? Then he remembered that he had
seen the white stonecrop in flower, a rare thing at that season.
He had never known exactly who was the woman who had
reared him, and he made up his mind that she must have been
his mother, and thought of her with redoubled tenderness. He
called to mind the lady's clothing in the old leathern trunk.
He thought that the Reverend Jaquemin Hérode would probably
one day or other be appointed dean of St. Peter's Port and
surrogate of the bishop, and that the rectory of St. Sampson
would become vacant. Next, he remembered that the morrow
of Christmas would be the twenty-seventh day of the moon,
and that consequently high water would be at twenty-one
minutes past three, the half-ebb at a quarter past seven, low
water at thirty-three minutes past nine, and half flood at thirty-nine
minutes past twelve. He recalled, in the most trifling
details, the costume of the Highlander who had sold him the
bagpipe; his bonnet with a thistle ornament, his claymore, his
close-fitting short jacket, his philabeg ornamented with a
pocket, and his snuff-horn, his pin set with a Scottish stone, his
two girdles, his sash and belts, his sword, cutlass, dirk, and
skene-dhu—his black-sheathed knife, with its black handle
ornamented with two cairngorms—and the bare knees of the
soldier; his socks, gaiters, and buckled shoes. This highly-equipped
figure became a spectre in his imagination, which
pursued him with a sense of feverishness as he sunk into oblivion.
When he awoke it was full daylight, and his first thought was
of Déruchette.</p>

<p>The next night he slept more soundly, but he was dreaming
again of the Scottish soldier. In the midst of his sleep he remembered
that the after-Christmas sittings of the Chief Law
Court would commence on the 21st of January. He dreamed
also about the Reverend Jaquemin Hérode. He thought of
Déruchette, and seemed to be in violent anger with her. He
wished he had been a child again to throw stones at her windows.
Then he thought that if he were a child again he should have
his mother by his side, and he began to sob.</p>

<p>Gilliatt had a project at this time of going to pass three
months at Chousey, or at the Miriquiers; but he did not go.</p>

<p>He walked no more along the road to St. Peter's Port.</p>

<p>He had an odd fancy that his name of "Gilliatt" had remained
there traced upon the ground, and that the passers-by
stopped to read it.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>II</h4>

<h5>THE UNKNOWN UNFOLDS ITSELF BY DEGREES</h5>


<p>On the other hand, Gilliatt had the satisfaction of seeing the
Bravées every day. By some accident he was continually passing
that way. His business seemed always to lead him by the
path which passed under the wall of Déruchette's garden.</p>

<p>One morning, as he was walking along this path, he heard a
market-woman who was returning from the Bravées, say to
another: "Mess Lethierry is fond of sea-kale."</p>

<p>He dug in his garden of the Bû de la Rue a trench for sea-kale.
The sea-kale is a vegetable which has a flavour like
asparagus.</p>

<p>The wall of the garden of the Bravées was very low; it would
have been easy to scale it. The idea of scaling it would have
appeared, to him, terrible. But there was nothing to hinder
his hearing, as any one else might, the voices of persons talking
as he passed, in the rooms or in the garden. He did not listen,
but he heard them. Once he could distinguish the voices of
the two servants, Grace and Douce, disputing. It was a sound
which belonged to the house, and their quarrel remained in his
ears like a remembrance of music.</p>

<p>On another occasion, he distinguished a voice which was
different, and which seemed to him to be the voice of Déruchette.
He quickened his pace, and was soon out of hearing.</p>

<p>The words uttered by that voice, however, remained fixed in
his memory. He repeated them at every instant. They were,
"Will you please give me the little broom?"</p>

<p>By degrees he became bolder. He had the daring to stay
awhile. One day it happened that Déruchette was singing at
her piano, altogether invisible from without, although her
window was open. The air was that of "Bonnie Dundee." He
grew pale, but he screwed his courage to the point of listening.</p>

<p>Springtide came. One day Gilliatt enjoyed a beatific vision.
The heavens were opened, and there, before his eyes, appeared
Déruchette, watering lettuces in her little garden.</p>

<p>Soon afterwards he look to doing more than merely listening
there. He watched her habits, observed her hours, and waited
to catch a glimpse of her.</p>

<p>In all this he was very careful not to be seen.</p>

<p>The year advanced; the time came when the trellises were
heavy with roses, and haunted by the butterflies. By little
and little, he had come to conceal himself for hours behind her
wall, motionless and silent, seen by no one, and holding his
breath as Déruchette passed in and out of her garden. Men
grow accustomed to poison by degrees.</p>

<p>From his hiding-place he could often hear the sound of
Déruchette conversing with Mess Lethierry under a thick arch
of leaves, in a spot where there was a garden-seat. The words
came distinctly to his ears.</p>

<p>What a change had come over him! He had even descended
to watch and listen. Alas! there is something of the character
of a spy in every human heart.</p>

<p>There was another garden-seat, visible to him, and nearer
Déruchette would sit there sometimes.</p>

<p>From the flowers that he had observed her gathering he had
guessed her taste in the matter of perfumes. The scent of the
bindweed was her favourite, then the pink, then the honeysuckle,
then the jasmine. The rose stood only fifth in the
scale. She looked at the lilies, but did not smell them.</p>

<p>Gilliatt figured her in his imagination from this choice of
odours. With each perfume he associated some perfection.</p>

<p>The very idea of speaking to Déruchette would have made
his hair stand on end. A poor old rag-picker, whose wandering
brought her, from time to time, into the little road leading
under the inclosure of the Bravées, had occasionally remarked
Gilliatt's assiduity beside the wall, and his devotion for this
retired spot. Did she connect the presence of a man before
this wall with the possibility of a woman behind it? Did she
perceive that vague, invisible thread? Was she, in her decrepit
mendicancy, still youthful enough to remember something of
the old happier days? And could she, in this dark night and
winter of her wretched life, still recognise the dawn? We know
not: but it appears that, on one occasion, passing near Gilliatt
at his post, she brought to bear upon him something as like a
smile as she was still capable of, and muttered between her
teeth, "It is getting warmer."</p>

<p>Gilliatt heard the words, and was struck by them. "It
warms one," he muttered, with an inward note of interrogation.
"It is getting warmer." What did the old woman mean?</p>

<p>He repeated the phrase mechanically all day, but he could
not guess its meaning.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>III</h4>

<h5>THE AIR "BONNIE DUNDEE" FINDS AN ECHO ON THE HILL</h5>


<p>It was in a spot behind the enclosure of the garden of the
Bravées, at an angle of the wall, half concealed with holly and
ivy, and covered with nettles, wild mallow, and large white
mullen growing between the blocks of stone, that he passed the
greater part of that summer. He watched there, lost in deep
thought. The lizards grew accustomed to his presence, and
basked in the sun among the same stones. The summer was
bright and full of dreamy indolence: overhead the light clouds
came and went. Gilliatt sat upon the grass. The air was full
of the songs of birds. He held his two hands up to his forehead,
sometimes trying to recollect himself: "Why should she write
my name in the snow?" From a distance the sea breeze came
up in gentle breaths, at intervals the horn of the quarrymen
sounded abruptly, warning the passers-by to take shelter, as
they shattered some mass with gunpowder. The Port of St.
Sampson was not visible from this place, but he could see the
tips of masts above the trees. The sea-gulls flew wide and
afar. Gilliatt had heard his mother say that women could
love men; that such things happened sometimes. He remembered
it; and said within himself, "Who knows, may not
Déruchette love me?" Then a feeling of sadness would come
upon him; he would say, "She, too, thinks of me in her turn.
It is well." He remembered that Déruchette was rich, and that
he was poor: and then the new boat appeared to him an execrable
invention. He could never remember what day of the month
it was. He would stare listlessly at the great bees, with their
yellow bodies and their short wings, as they entered with a
buzzing noise into the holes in the wall.</p>

<p>One evening Déruchette went in-doors to retire to bed. She
approached her window to close it. The night was dark.
Suddenly, something caught her ear, and she listened. Somewhere
in the darkness there was a sound of music. It was
some one, perhaps, on the hill-side, or at the foot of the towers
of Vale Castle, or, perhaps, further still, playing an air upon
some instrument. Déruchette recognised her favourite melody,
"Bonnie Dundee," played upon the bagpipe. She thought
little of it.</p>

<p>From that night the music might be heard again from time
to time at the same hours, particularly when the nights were
very dark.</p>

<p>Déruchette was not much pleased with all this.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>IV</h4>

<p><span style="margin-left: 8em;">"A serenade by night may please a lady fair,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 8em;"> the troubadour beware."</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 20em;"><i>Unpublished Comedy</i></span><br />
</p>


<p>Four years passed away.</p>

<p>Déruchette was approaching her twenty-first year, and was
still unmarried. Some writer has said that a fixed idea is a sort
of gimlet; every year gives it another turn. To pull out the
first year is like plucking out the hair by the roots; in the second
year, like tearing the skin; in the third, like breaking the bones;
and in the fourth, like removing the very brain itself.</p>

<p>Gilliatt had arrived at this fourth stage.</p>

<p>He had never yet spoken a word to Déruchette. He lived
and dreamed near that delightful vision. This was all.</p>

<p>It happened one day that, finding himself by chance at St.
Sampson, he had seen Déruchette talking with Mess Lethierry
at the door of the Bravées, which opens upon the roadway of
the port. Gilliatt ventured to approach very near. He fancied
that at the very moment of his passing she had smiled. There
was nothing impossible in that.</p>

<p>Déruchette still heard, from time to time, the sound of the
bagpipe.</p>

<p>Mess Lethierry had also heard this bagpipe. By degrees he
had come to remark this persevering musician under Déruchette's
window. A tender strain, too; all the more suspicious. A
nocturnal gallant was a thing not to his taste. His wish was
to marry Déruchette in his own time, when she was willing and
he was willing, purely and simply, without any romance, or
music, or anything of that sort. Irritated at it, he had at last
kept a watch, and he fancied that he had detected Gilliatt. He
passed his fingers through his beard—a sign of anger—and
grumbled out, "What has that fellow got to pipe about? He
is in love with Déruchette, that is clear. You waste your time,
young man. Any one who wants Déruchette must come to me,
and not loiter about playing the flute."</p>

<p>An event of importance, long foreseen, occurred soon afterwards.
It was announced that the Reverend Jaquemin
Hérode was appointed surrogate of the Bishop of Winchester,
dean of the island, and rector of St. Peter's Port, and that he
would leave St. Sampson for St. Peter's immediately after his
successor should be installed.</p>

<p>It could not be long to the arrival of the new rector. He
was a gentleman of Norman extraction, Monsieur Ebenezer
Caudray.</p>

<p>Some facts were known about the new rector, which the
benevolent and malevolent interpreted in a contrary sense. He
was known to be young and poor, but his youth was tempered
with much learning, and his poverty by good expectations.
In the dialect specially invented for the subject of riches and
inheritances, death goes by the name of "expectations." He
was the nephew and heir of the aged and opulent dean of St.
Asaph. At the death of this old gentleman he would be a rich
man. M. Caudray had distinguished relations. He was almost
entitled to the quality of "Honourable." As regarded his
doctrine, people judged differently. He was an Anglican, but,
according to the expression of Bishop Tillotson, a "libertine"—that
is, in reality, one who was very severe. He repudiated
all pharisaism. He was a friend rather of the Presbytery than
the Episcopacy. He dreamed of the Primitive Church of the
days when even Adam had the right to choose his Eve, and when
Frumentinus, Bishop of Hierapolis, carried off a young maiden
to make her his wife, and said to her parents, "Her will is such,
and such is mine. You are no longer her mother, and you
are no longer her father. I am the Bishop of Hierapolis, and
this is my wife. Her father is in heaven." If the common
belief could be trusted, M. Caudray subordinated the text,
"Honour thy father and thy mother," to that other text, in
his eyes of higher significance, "The woman is the flesh of
the man. She shall leave her father and mother to follow
her husband." This tendency, however, to circumscribe the
parental authority and to favour religiously every mode of
forming the conjugal tie, is peculiar to all Protestantism, particularly
in England, and singularly so in America.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>V</h4>

<h5>A DESERVED SUCCESS HAS ALWAYS ITS DETRACTORS</h5>


<p>At this period the affairs of Mess Lethierry were in this position:—The
Durande had well fulfilled all his expectations. He had
paid his debts, repaired his misfortunes, discharged his obligations
at Brême, met his acceptances at St. Malo. He had paid
off the mortgage upon his house at the Bravées, and had bought
up all the little local rent charges upon the property. He was
also the proprietor of a great productive capital. This was the
Durande herself. The net revenue from the boat was about a
thousand pounds sterling per annum, and the traffic was constantly
increasing. Strictly speaking, the Durande constituted
his entire fortune. She was also the fortune of the island. The
carriage of cattle being one of the most profitable portions of her
trade, he had been obliged, in order to facilitate the stowage,
and the embarking and disembarking of animals, to do away
with the luggage-boxes and the two boats. It was, perhaps,
imprudent. The Durande had but one boat—namely, her
long-boat; but this was an excellent one.</p>

<p>Ten years had elapsed since Rantaine's robbery.</p>

<p>This prosperity of the Durande had its weak point. It inspired
no confidence. People regarded it as a risk. Lethierry's
good fortune was looked upon as exceptional. He was considered
to have gained by a lucky rashness. Some one in the
Isle of Wight who had imitated him had not succeeded. The
enterprise had ruined the shareholders. The engines, in fact,
were badly constructed. But people shook their heads. Innovations
have always to contend with the difficulty that few wish
them well. The least false step compromises them.</p>

<p>One of the commercial oracles of the Channel Islands, a
certain banker from Paris, named Jauge, being consulted upon
a steamboat speculation, was reported to have turned his back,
with the remark, "An investment is it you propose to me?
Exactly; an investment in smoke."</p>

<p>On the other hand, the sailing vessels had no difficulty in
finding capitalists to take shares in a venture. Capital, in fact,
was obstinately in favour of sails, and as obstinately against
boilers and paddle-wheels. At Guernsey, the Durande was
indeed a fact, but steam was not yet an established principle.
Such is the fanatical spirit of conservatism in opposition to
progress. They said of Lethierry, "It is all very well; but he
could not do it a second time." Far from encouraging, his
example inspired timidity. Nobody would have dared to risk
another Durande.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VI</h4>

<h5>THE SLOOP "CASHMERE" SAVES A SHIPWRECKED CREW</h5>


<p>The equinoctial gales begin early in the Channel. The sea
there is narrow, and the winds disturb it easily. The westerly
gales begin from the month of February, and the waves are
beaten about from every quarter. Navigation becomes an
anxious matter. The people on the coasts look to the signal-post,
and begin to watch for vessels in distress. The sea is
then like a cut-throat in ambush for his victim. An invisible
trumpet sounds the alarm of war with the elements, furious
blasts spring up from the horizon, and a terrible wind soon begins
to blow. The dark night whistles and howls. In the depth of
the clouds the black tempest distends its cheeks, and the storm
arises.</p>

<p>The wind is one danger; the fogs are another.</p>

<p>Fogs have from all time been the terror of mariners. In
certain fogs microscopic prisms of ice are found in suspension,
to which Mariotte attributes halos, mock suns, and paraselenes.
Storm-fogs are of a composite character; various gases of unequal
specific gravity combine with the vapour of water, and
arrange themselves, layer over layer, in an order which divides
the dense mist into zones. Below ranges the iodine; above the
iodine is the sulphur; above the sulphur the brome; above the
brome the phosphorus. This, in a certain manner, and making
allowance for electric and magnetic tension, explains several
phenomena, as the St. Elmo's Fire of Columbus and Magellan,
the flying stars moving about the ships, of which Seneca speaks;
the two flames, Castor and Pollux, mentioned by Plutarch; the
Roman legion, whose spears appeared to Cæsar to take fire;
the peak of the Chateau of Duino in Friuli which the sentinel
made to sparkle by touching it with his lance; and perhaps
even those fulgurations from the earth which the ancients called
Satan's terrestrial lightnings. At the equator, an immense
mist seems permanently to encircle the globe. It is known as
the cloud-ring. The function of the cloud-ring is to temper
the heat of the tropics, as that of the Gulf-stream is to mitigate
the coldness of the Pole. Under the cloud-ring fogs are fatal.
These are what are called <i>horse latitudes</i>. It was here that
navigators of bygone ages were accustomed to cast their horses
into the sea to lighten the ship in stormy weather, and to
economise the fresh water when becalmed. Columbus said,
"<i>Nube abaxo ex muerte</i>," death lurks in the low cloud. The
Etruscans, who bear the same relation to meteorology which the
Chaldeans did to astronomy, had two high priests—the high
priest of the thunder, and the high priest of the clouds. The
"fulgurators" observed the lightning, and the weather sages
watched the mists. The college of Priest-Augurs was consulted
by the Syrians, the Phœnicians, the Pelasgi, and all the primitive
navigators of the ancient <i>Mare Internum</i>. The origin of
tempests was, from that time forward, partially understood.
It is intimately connected with the generation of fogs, and is,
properly speaking, the same phenomenon. There exist upon
the ocean three regions of fogs, one equatorial and two polar.
The mariners give them but one name, the <i>pitch-pot</i>.</p>

<p>In all latitudes, and particularly in the Channel, the equinoctial
fogs are dangerous. They shed a sudden darkness over
the sea. One of the perils of fogs, even when not very dense,
arises from their preventing the mariners perceiving the change
of the bed of the sea by the variations of the colour of the water.
The result is a dangerous concealment of the approach of sands
and breakers. The vessel steers towards the shoals without
receiving any warning. Frequently the fogs leave a ship no
resource except to lie-to, or to cast anchor. There are as many
shipwrecks from the fogs as from the winds.</p>

<p>After a very violent squall succeeding one of these foggy days,
the mail-boat <i>Cashmere</i> arrived safely from England. It
entered at St. Peter's Port as the first gleam of day appeared
upon the sea, and at the very moment when the cannon of
Castle Cornet announced the break of day. The sky had
cleared: the sloop <i>Cashmere</i> was anxiously expected, as she
was to bring the new rector of St. Sampson.</p>

<p>A little after the arrival of the sloop, a rumour ran through
the town that she had been hailed during the night at sea by a
long-boat containing a shipwrecked crew.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VII</h4>

<h5>HOW AN IDLER HAD THE GOOD FORTUNE TO BE SEEN BY A FISHERMAN</h5>


<p>On that very night, at the moment when the wind abated,
Gilliatt had gone out with his nets, without, however, taking
his famous old Dutch boat too far from the coast.</p>

<p>As he was returning with the rising tide, towards two o'clock
in the afternoon, the sun was shining brightly, and he passed
before the Beast's Horn to reach the little bay of the Bû de la
Rue. At that moment he fancied that he saw, in the projection
of the "Gild-Holm-'Ur" seat a shadow, which was not that of
the rock. He steered his vessel nearer, and was able to perceive
a man sitting in the "Gild-Holm-'Ur." The sea was already
very high, the rock encircled by the waves, and escape entirely
cut off. Gilliatt made signs to the man. The stranger remained
motionless. Gilliatt drew nearer; the man was asleep.</p>

<p>He was attired in black. "He looks like a priest," thought
Gilliatt. He approached still nearer, and could distinguish the
face of a young man.</p>

<p>The features were unknown to him.</p>

<p>The rock, happily, was peaked; there was a good depth.
Gilliatt wore off, and succeeded in skirting the rocky wall.
The tide raised the bark so high that Gilliatt, by standing upon
the gunwale of the sloop, could touch the man's feet. He
raised himself upon the planking, and stretched out his hands.
If he had fallen at that moment, it is doubtful if he would have
risen again on the water; the waves were rolling in between the
boat and the rock, and destruction would have been inevitable.
He pulled the foot of the sleeping man. "Ho! there. What
are you doing in this place?"</p>

<p>The man aroused, and muttered—</p>

<p>"I was looking about."</p>

<p>He was now completely awake, and continued—</p>

<p>"I have just arrived in this part. I came this way on a
pleasure trip. I have passed the night on the sea: the view
from here seemed beautiful. I was weary, and fell asleep."</p>

<p>"Ten minutes later, and you would have been drowned."</p>

<p>"Ha!"</p>

<p>"Jump into my bark."</p>

<p>Gilliatt kept the bark fast with his foot, clutched the rock
with one hand, and stretched out the other to the stranger in
black, who sprang quickly into the boat. He was a fine young
man.</p>

<p>Gilliatt seized the tiller, and in two minutes his boat entered
the bay of the Bû de la Rue.</p>

<p>The young man wore a round hat and a white cravat; and his
long black frock-coat was buttoned up to the neck. He had
fair hair, which he wore <i>en couronne</i>. He had a somewhat
feminine cast of features, a clear eye, a grave manner.</p>

<p>Meanwhile the boat had touched the ground. Gilliatt passed
the cable through the mooring-ring, then turned and perceived
the young man holding out a sovereign in a very white hand.</p>

<p>Gilliatt moved the hand gently away.</p>

<p>There was a pause. The young man was the first to break
the silence.</p>

<p>"You have saved me from death."</p>

<p>"Perhaps," replied Gilliatt.</p>

<p>The moorings were made fast, and they went ashore.</p>

<p>The stranger continued—</p>

<p>"I owe you my life, sir."</p>

<p>"No matter."</p>

<p>This reply from Gilliatt was again followed by a pause.</p>

<p>"Do you belong to this parish?"</p>

<p>"No," replied Gilliatt.</p>

<p>"To what parish, then?"</p>

<p>Gilliatt lifted up his right hand, pointed to the sky, and
said—</p>

<p>"To that yonder."</p>

<p>The young man bowed, and left him.</p>

<p>After walking a few paces, the stranger stopped, felt in his
pocket, drew out a book, and returning towards Gilliatt, offered
it to him.</p>

<p>"Permit me to make you a present of this."</p>

<p>Gilliatt took the volume.</p>

<p>It was a Bible.</p>

<p>An instant after, Gilliatt, leaning upon the parapet, was
following the young man with his eyes as he turned the angle of
the path which led to St. Sampson.</p>

<p>By little and little he lowered his gaze, forgot all about
the stranger—knew no more whether the "Gild-Holm-'Ur"
existed. Everything disappeared before him in the bottomless
depth of a reverie.</p>

<p>There was one abyss which swallowed up all his thought.
This was Déruchette.</p>

<p>A voice calling him, aroused him from this dream.</p>

<p>"Ho there, Gilliatt!"</p>

<p>He recognised the voice and looked up.</p>

<p>"What is the matter, Sieur Landoys?"</p>

<p>It was, in fact, Sieur Landoys, who was passing along the
road about one hundred paces from the Bû de la Rue in his
phaeton, drawn by one little horse. He had stopped to hail
Gilliatt, but he seemed hurried.</p>

<p>"There is news, Gilliatt."</p>

<p>"Where is that?"</p>

<p>"At the Bravées."</p>

<p>"What is it?"</p>

<p>"I am too far off to tell you the story."</p>

<p>Gilliatt shuddered.</p>

<p>"Is Miss Déruchette going to be married?"</p>

<p>"No; but she had better look out for a husband."</p>

<p>"What do you mean?"</p>

<p>"Go up to the house, and you will learn."</p>

<p>And Sieur Landoys whipped on his horse.</p>



