<h3>BOOK II</h3>

<h4>THE LABOUR</h4>

<h4>I</h4>

<h5>THE RESOURCES OF ONE WHO HAS NOTHING</h5>


<p>The cavern did not easily part with its explorers. The entry
had been difficult; going back was more difficult still. Gilliatt,
however, succeeded in extricating himself; but he did not
return there. He had found nothing of what he was in quest
of, and he had not the time to indulge curiosity.</p>

<p>He put the forge in operation at once. Tools were wanting;
he set to work and made them.</p>

<p>For fuel he had the wreck; for motive force the water; for
his bellows the wind; for his anvil a stone; for art his instinct;
for power his will.</p>

<p>He entered with ardour upon his sombre labours.</p>

<p>The weather seemed to smile upon his work. It continued
to be dry and free from equinoctial gales. The month of March
had come, but it was tranquil. The days grew longer. The
blue of the sky, the gentleness of all the movements of the scene,
the serenity of the noontide, seemed to exclude the idea of
mischief. The waves danced merrily in the sunlight. A Judas
kiss is the first step to treachery; of such caresses the ocean is
prodigal. Her smile, like that of woman's sometimes, cannot
be trusted.</p>

<p>There was little wind. The hydraulic bellows worked all the
better for that reason. Much wind would have embarrassed
rather than aided it. Gilliatt had a saw; he manufactured for
himself a file. With the saw he attacked the wood; with the
file the metal. Then he availed himself of the two iron hands
of the smith—the pincers and the pliers. The pincers gripe, the
pliers handle; the one is like the closed hand, the other like the
fingers. By degrees he made for himself a number of auxiliaries,
and constructed his armour. With a piece of hoop-wood he
made a screen for his forge-fire.</p>

<p>One of his principal labours was the sorting and repair of
pulleys. He mended both the blocks and the sheaves of tackle.
He cut down the irregularities of all broken joists, and reshaped
the extremities. He had, as we have said, for the necessities
of his carpentry, a quantity of pieces of wood, stored away, and
arranged according to the forms, the dimensions, and the nature
of their grain; the oak on one side, the pine on the other; the
short pieces like riders, separated from the straight pieces like
binding strakes. This formed his reserve of supports and levers,
of which he might stand in great need at any moment.</p>

<p>Any one who intends to construct hoisting tackle ought to
provide himself with beams and small cables. But that is not
sufficient. He must have cordage. Gilliatt restored the cables,
large and small. He frayed out the tattered sails, and succeeded
in converting them into an excellent yarn, of which he made
twine. With this he joined the ropes. The joins, however,
were liable to rot. It was necessary, therefore, to hasten to
make use of these cables. He had only been able to make white
tow, for he was without tar.</p>

<p>The ropes mended, he proceeded to repair the chains.</p>

<p>Thanks to the lateral point of the stone anvil, which served
the part of the conoid bicorn, he was able to forge rings rude in
shape but strong. With these he fastened together the severed
lengths of chains, and made long pieces.</p>

<p>To work at a forge without assistance is something more than
troublesome. He succeeded nevertheless. It is true that he
had only to forge and shape articles of comparatively small size,
which he was able to handle with the pliers in one hand, while
he hammered with the other.</p>

<p>He cut into lengths the iron bars of the captain's bridge on
which Clubin used to pass to and fro from paddle-box to paddle-box
giving his orders; forged at one extremity of each piece a
point, and at the other a flat head. By this means he manufactured
large nails of about a foot in length. These nails, much
used in pontoon making, are useful in fixing anything in rocks.</p>

<p>What was his object in all these labours? We shall see.</p>

<p>He was several times compelled to renew the blade of his
hatchet and the teeth of his saw. For renotching the saw he
had manufactured a three-sided file.</p>

<p>Occasionally he made use of the capstan of the Durande.
The hook of the chain broke: he made another.</p>

<p>By the aid of his pliers and pincers, and by using his chisel as
a screwdriver, he set to work to remove the two paddle-wheels
of the vessel; an object which he accomplished. This was
rendered practicable by reason of a peculiarity in their construction.
The paddle-boxes which covered them served him to
stow them away. With the planks of these paddle-boxes, he
made two cases in which he deposited the two paddles, piece by
piece, each part being carefully numbered.</p>

<p>His lump of chalk became precious for this purpose.</p>

<p>He kept the two cases upon the strongest part of the wreck.</p>

<p>When these preliminaries were completed, he found himself
face to face with the great difficulty. The problem of the engine
of the Durande was now clearly before him.</p>

<p>Taking the paddle-wheels to pieces had proved practicable.
It was very different with the machinery.</p>

<p>In the first place, he was almost entirely ignorant of the
details of the mechanism. Working thus blindly he might do
some irreparable damage. Then, even in attempting to dismember
it, if he had ventured on that course, far other tools
would be necessary than such as he could fabricate with a
cavern for a forge, a wind-draught for bellows, and a stone
for an anvil. In attempting, therefore, to take to pieces the
machinery, there was the risk of destroying it.</p>

<p>The attempt seemed at first sight wholly impracticable.</p>

<p>The apparent impossibility of the project rose before him like
a stone wall, blocking further progress.</p>

<p>What was to be done?</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>II</h4>

<h5>WHEREIN SHAKESPEARE AND ÆSCHYLUS MEET</h5>


<p>Gilliatt had a notion.</p>

<p>Since the time of the carpenter-mason of Salbris, who, in the
sixteenth century, in the dark ages of science—long before
Amontons had discovered the first law of electricity, or Lahire
the second, or Coulomb the third—without other helper than
a child, his son, with ill-fashioned tools, in the chamber of the
great clock of La Charité-sur-Loire, resolved at one stroke five
or six problems in statics and dynamics inextricably intervolved
like the wheels in a block of carts and waggons—since the time
of that grand and marvellous achievement of the poor workman,
who found means, without breaking a single piece of wire,
without throwing one of the teeth of the wheels out of gear, to
lower in one piece, by a marvellous simplification, from the
second story of the clock-tower to the first, that massive monitor
of the hours, made all of iron and brass, "large as the room in
which the man watches at night from the tower," with its
motion, its cylinders, its barrels, its drum, its hooks, and its
weights, the barrel of its spring steel-yard, its horizontal pendulum,
the holdfasts of its escapement, its reels of large and
small chains, its stone weights, one of which weighed five
hundred pounds, its bells, its peals, its jacks that strike the
hours—since the days, I say, of the man who accomplished this
miracle, and of whom posterity knows not even the name—nothing
that could be compared with the project which Gilliatt
was meditating had ever been attempted.</p>

<p>The ponderousness, the delicacy, the involvement of the difficulties
were not less in the machinery of the Durande than in
the clock of La Charité-sur-Loire.</p>

<p>The untaught mechanic had his helpmate—his son; Gilliatt
was alone.</p>

<p>A crowd gathered together from Meung-sur-Loire, from
Nevers, and even from Orleans, able at time of need to assist
the mason of Salbris, and to encourage him with their friendly
voices. Gilliatt had around him no voices but those of the
wind; no crowd but the assemblage of waves.</p>

<p>There is nothing more remarkable than the timidity of
ignorance, unless it be its temerity. When ignorance becomes
daring, she has sometimes a sort of compass within herself—the
intuition of the truth, clearer oftentimes in a simple mind than
in a learned brain.</p>

<p>Ignorance invites to an attempt. It is a state of wonderment,
which, with its concomitant curiosity, forms a power. Knowledge
often enough disconcerts and makes over-cautious. Gama,
had he known what lay before him, would have recoiled before
the Cape of Storms. If Columbus had been a great geographer,
he might have failed to discover America.</p>

<p>The second successful climber of Mont Blanc was the savant,
Saussure; the first the goatherd, Balmat.</p>

<p>These instances I admit are exceptions, which detract nothing
from science, which remains the rule. The ignorant man may
discover; it is the learned who invent.</p>

<p>The sloop was still at anchor in the creek of "The Man Rock,"
where the sea left it in peace. Gilliatt, as will be remembered,
had arranged everything for maintaining constant communication
with it. He visited the sloop and measured her beam
carefully in several parts, but particularly her midship frame.
Then he returned to the Durande and measured the diameter
of the floor of the engine-room. This diameter, of course,
without the paddles, was two feet less than the broadest part of
the deck of his bark. The machinery, therefore, might be put
aboard the sloop.</p>

<p>But how could it be got there?</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>III</h4>

<h5>GILLIATT'S MASTERPIECE COMES TO THE RESCUE OF THAT OF LETHIERRY</h5>


<p>Any fisherman who had been mad enough to loiter in that
season in the neighbourhood of Gilliatt's labours about this
time would have been repaid for his hardihood, by a singular
sight between the two Douvres.</p>

<p>Before his eyes would have appeared four stout beams, at
equal distances, stretching from one Douvre to the other, and
apparently forced into the rock, which is the firmest of all holds.
On the Little Douvre, their extremities were laid and buttressed
upon the projections of rock. On the Great Douvre, they had
been driven in by blows of a hammer, by the powerful hand
of a workman standing upright upon the beam itself. These
supports were a little longer than the distance between the
rocks. Hence the firmness of their hold; and hence, also, their
slanting position. They touched the Great Douvre at an acute,
and the Little Douvre at an obtuse angle. Their inclination
was only slight; but it was unequal, which was a defect. But
for this defect, they might have been supposed to be prepared
to receive the planking of a deck. To these four beams were
attached four sets of hoisting apparatus, each having its pendent
and its tackle-fall, with the bold peculiarity of having the tackle-blocks
with two sheaves at one extremity of the beam, and the
simple pulleys at the opposite end. This distance, which was
too great not to be perilous, was necessitated by the operations
to be effected. The blocks were firm, and the pulleys strong.
To this tackle-gear cables were attached, which from a distance
looked like threads; while beneath this apparatus of tackle and
carpentry, in the air, the massive hull of the Durande seemed
suspended by threads.</p>

<p>She was not yet suspended, however. Under the cross beams,
eight perpendicular holes had been made in the deck, four on
the port, and four on the starboard side of the engine; eight
other holes had been made beneath them through the keel. The
cables, descending vertically from the four tackle-blocks, through
the deck, passed out at the keel, and under the machinery, re-entered
the ship by the holes on the other side, and passing again
upward through the deck, returned, and were wound round the
beams. Here a sort of jigger-tackle held them in a bunch bound
fast to a single cable, capable of being directed by one arm. The
single cable passed over a hook, and through a dead-eye, which
completed the apparatus, and kept it in check. This combination
compelled the four tacklings to work together, and acting as
a complete restraint upon the suspending powers, became a sort
of dynamical rudder in the hand of the pilot of the operation,
maintaining the movements in equilibrium. The ingenious
adjustment of this system of tackling had some of the simplifying
qualities of the Weston pulley of these times, with a
mixture of the antique polyspaston of Vitruvius. Gilliatt had
discovered this, although he knew nothing of the dead Vitruvius
or of the still unborn Weston. The length of the cables varied,
according to the unequal declivity of the cross-beams. The
ropes were dangerous, for the untarred hemp was liable to give
way. Chains would have been better in this respect, but chains
would not have passed well through the tackle-blocks.</p>

<p>The apparatus was full of defects; but as the work of one
man, it was surprising. For the rest, it will be understood that
many details are omitted which would render the construction
perhaps intelligible to practical mechanics, but obscure to others.</p>

<p>The top of the funnel passed between the two beams in the
middle.</p>

<p>Gilliatt, without suspecting it, had reconstructed, three centuries
later, the mechanism of the Salbris carpenter—a mechanism
rude and incorrect, and hazardous for him who would dare
to use it.</p>

<p>Here let us remark, that the rudest defects do not prevent
a mechanism from working well or ill. It may limp, but it
moves. The obelisk in the square of St. Peter's at Rome is
erected in a way which offends against all the principles of
statics. The carriage of the Czar Peter was so constructed that
it appeared about to overturn at every step; but it travelled
onward for all that. What deformities are there in the
machinery of Marly! Everything that is heterodox in hydraulics.
Yet it did not supply Louis XIV. any the less with
water.</p>

<p>Come what might, Gilliatt had faith. He had even anticipated
success so confidently as to fix in the bulwarks of the
sloop, on the day when he measured its proportions, two pairs
of corresponding iron rings on each side, exactly at the same
distances as the four rings on board the Durande, to which were
attached the four chains of the funnel.</p>

<p>He had in his mind a very complete and settled plan. All
the chances being against him, he had evidently determined
that all the precautions at least should be on his side.</p>

<p>He did some things which seemed useless; a sign of attentive
premeditation.</p>

<p>His manner of proceeding would, as we have said, have
puzzled an observer, even though familiar with mechanical
operations.</p>

<p>A witness of his labour who had seen him, for example, with
enormous efforts, and at the risk of breaking his neck, driving
with blows of his hammer eight or ten great nails which he had
forged into the base of the two Douvres at the entrance of the
defile between them, would have had some difficulty in understanding
the object of these nails, and would probably have
wondered what could be the use of all that trouble.</p>

<p>If he had then seen him measuring the portion of the fore
bulwark which had remained, as we have described it, hanging
on by the wreck, then attaching a strong cable to the upper
edge of that portion, cutting away with strokes of his hatchet
the dislocated fastenings which held it, then dragging it out of
the defile, pushing the lower part by the aid of the receding tide,
while he dragged the upper part; finally, by great labour,
fastening with the cable this heavy mass of planks and piles
wider than the entrance of the defile itself, with the nails driven
into the base of the Little Douvre, the observer would perhaps
have found it still more difficult to comprehend, and might have
wondered why Gilliatt, if he wanted for the purpose of his
operations to disencumber the space between the two rocks of
this mass, had not allowed it to fall into the sea, where the tide
would have carried it away.</p>

<p>Gilliatt had probably his reasons.</p>

<p>In fixing the nails in the basement of the rocks, he had taken
advantage of all the cracks in the granite, enlarged them where
needful, and driven in first of all wedges of wood, in which he
fixed the nails. He made a rough commencement of similar
preparations in the two rocks which rose at the other extremity
of the narrow passage on the eastern side. He furnished with
plugs of wood all the crevices, as if he desired to keep these
also ready to hold nails or clamps; but this appeared to be a
simple precaution, for he did not use them further. He was
compelled to economise, and only to use his materials as he had
need, and at the moment when the necessity for them came.
This was another addition to his numerous difficulties.</p>

<p>As fast as one labour was accomplished another became necessary.
Gilliatt passed without hesitation from task to task,
and resolutely accomplished his giant strides.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>IV</h4>

<h5>SUB RE</h5>


<p>The aspect of the man who accomplished all these labours
became terrible.</p>

<p>Gilliatt in his multifarious tasks expended all his strength
at once, and regained it with difficulty.</p>

<p>Privations on the one hand, lassitude on the other, had much
reduced him. His hair and beard had grown long. He had
but one shirt which was not in rags. He went about bare-footed,
the wind having carried away one of his shoes and the
sea the other. Fractures of the rude and dangerous stone anvil
which he used had left small wounds upon his hands and arms,
the marks of labour. These wounds, or rather scratches, were
superficial; but the keen air and the salt sea irritated them
continually.</p>

<p>He was generally hungry, thirsty, and cold.</p>

<p>His store of fresh water was gone; his rye-meal was used or
eaten. He had nothing left but a little biscuit.</p>

<p>This he broke with his teeth, having no water in which to
steep it.</p>

<p>By little and little, and day by day, his powers decreased.</p>

<p>The terrible rocks were consuming his existence.</p>

<p>How to obtain food was a problem; how to get drink was
a problem; how to find rest was a problem.</p>

<p>He ate when he was fortunate enough to find a crayfish or a
crab; he drank when he chanced to see a sea-bird descend upon
a point of rock; for on climbing up to the spot he generally
found there a hollow with a little fresh water. He drank from
it after the bird; sometimes with the bird; for the gulls and
seamews had become accustomed to him, and no longer flew
away at his approach. Even in his greatest need of food he did
not attempt to molest them. He had, as will be remembered,
a superstition about birds. The birds on their part—now that
his hair was rough and wild and his beard long—had no fear of
him. The change in his face gave them confidence; he had lost
resemblance to men, and taken the form of the wild beast.</p>

<p>The birds and Gilliatt, in fact, had become good friends.
Companions in poverty, they helped each other. As long as
he had had any meal, he had crumbled for them some little bits
of the cakes he made. In his deeper distress they showed him
in their turn the places where he might find the little pools of
water.</p>

<p>He ate the shell-fish raw. Shell-fish help in a certain degree
to quench the thirst. The crabs he cooked. Having no kettle,
he roasted them between two stones made red-hot in his fire,
after the manner of the savages of the Feroe islands.</p>

<p>Meanwhile signs of the equinoctial season had begun to
appear. There came rain—an angry rain. No showers or
steady torrents, but fine, sharp, icy, penetrating points which
pierced to his skin through his clothing, and to his bones through
his skin. It was a rain which yielded little water for drinking,
but which drenched him none the less.</p>

<p>Chary of assistance, prodigal of misery—such was the character
of these rains. During one week Gilliatt suffered from
them all day and all night.</p>

<p>At night, in his rocky recess, nothing but the overpowering
fatigue of his daily work enabled him to get sleep. The great
sea-gnats stung him, and he awakened covered with blisters.</p>

<p>He had a kind of low fever, which sustained him; this fever
is a succour which destroys. By instinct he chewed the mosses,
or sucked the leaves of wild cochlearia, scanty tufts of which
grew in the dry crevices of the rocks. Of his suffering, however,
he took little heed. He had no time to spare from his work
to the consideration of his own privations. The rescue of the
machinery of the Durande was progressing well. That sufficed
for him.</p>

<p>Every now and then, for the necessities of his work, he
jumped into the water, swam to some point, and gained a footing
again. He simply plunged into the sea and left it, as a man
passes from one room in his dwelling to another.</p>

<p>His clothing was never dry. It was saturated with rain
water, which had no time to evaporate, and with sea water,
which never dries. He lived perpetually wet.</p>

<p>Living in wet clothing is a habit which may be acquired.
The poor groups of Irish people—old men, mothers, girls
almost naked, and infants—who pass the winter in the open air,
under the snow and rain, huddled together, sometimes at the
corners of houses in the streets of London, live and die in this
condition.</p>

<p>To be soaked with wet, and yet to be thirsty: Gilliatt grew
familiar with this strange torture. There were times when he
was glad to suck the sleeve of his loose coat.</p>

<p>The fire which he made scarcely warmed him. A fire in open
air yields little comfort. It burns on one side, and freezes on
the other.</p>

<p>Gilliatt often shivered even while sweating over his forge.</p>

<p>Everywhere about him rose resistance amidst a terrible
silence. He felt himself the enemy of an unseen combination.
There is a dismal <i>non possumus</i> in nature. The inertia of
matter is like a sullen threat. A mysterious persecution environed
him. He suffered from heats and shiverings. The
fire ate into his flesh; the water froze him; feverish thirst
tormented him; the wind tore his clothing; hunger undermined
the organs of the body. The oppression of all these
things was constantly exhausting him. Obstacles silent,
immense, seemed to converge from all points, with the blind
irresponsibility of fate, yet full of a savage unanimity. He
felt them pressing inexorably upon him. No means were there
of escaping from them. His sufferings produced the impression
of some living persecutor. He had a constant sense of something
working against him, of a hostile form ever present, ever
labouring to circumvent and to subdue him. He could have
fled from the struggle; but since he remained, he had no choice
but to war with this impenetrable hostility. He asked himself
what it was. It took hold of him, grasped him tightly, overpowered
him, deprived him of breath. The invisible persecutor
was destroying him by slow degrees. Every day the
oppression became greater, as if a mysterious screw had received
another turn.</p>

<p>His situation in this dreadful spot resembled a duel, in which
a suspicion of some treachery haunts the mind of one of the
combatants.</p>

<p>Now it seemed a coalition of obscure forces which surrounded
him. He felt that there was somewhere a determination to be
rid of his presence. It is thus that the glacier chases the
loitering ice-block.</p>

<p>Almost without seeming to touch him this latent coalition
had reduced him to rags; had left him bleeding, distressed, and,
as it were, <i>hors de combat</i>, even before the battle. He laboured,
indeed, not the less—without pause or rest; but as the work
advanced, the workman himself lost ground. It might have
been fancied that Nature, dreading his bold spirit, adopted the
plan of slowly undermining his bodily power. Gilliatt kept his
ground, and left the rest to the future. The sea had begun by
consuming him; what would come next?</p>

<p>The double Douvres—that dragon made of granite, and
lying in ambush in mid-ocean—had sheltered him. It had
allowed him to enter, and to do his will; but its hospitality
resembled the welcome of devouring jaws.</p>

<p>The desert, the boundless surface, the unfathomable space
around him and above, so full of negatives to man's will; the
mute, inexorable determination of phenomena following their
appointed course; the grand general law of things, implacable
and passive; the ebbs and flows; the rocks themselves, dark
Pleiades whose points were each a star amid vortices, a centre
of an irradiation of currents; the strange, indefinable conspiracy
to stifle with indifference the temerity of a living being;
the wintry winds, the clouds, and the beleaguering waves
enveloped him, closed round him slowly, and in a measure shut
him in, and separated him from companionship, like a dungeon
built up by degrees round a living man. All against him;
nothing for him; he felt himself isolated, abandoned, enfeebled,
sapped, forgotten. His storehouse empty, his tools broken or
defective; he was tormented with hunger and thirst by day,
with cold by night. His sufferings had left him with wounds
and tatters, rags covering sores, torn hands, bleeding feet,
wasted limbs, pallid cheeks, and eyes bright with a strange
light; but this was the steady flame of his determination.</p>

<p>The virtue of a man is betrayed by his eyes. How much of
the man there is in us may be read in their depths. We make
ourselves known by the light that gleams beneath our brows.
The petty natures wink at us, the larger send forth flashes. If
there is no brilliancy under the lids, there is no thought in the
brain, no love in the heart. Those who love desire, and those
who desire sparkle and flash. Determination gives a fire to the
glance, a magnificent fire that consumes all timid thoughts.</p>

<p>It is the self-willed ones who are sublime. He who is only
brave, has but a passing fit, he who is only valiant has temperament
and nothing more, he who is courageous has but one
virtue. He who persists in the truth is the grand character.
The secret of great hearts may be summed up in the word:
Perseverando. Perseverance is to courage what the wheel is to
the lever; it is the continual renewing of the centre of support.
Let the desired goal be on earth or in heaven, only make for the
goal. Everything is in that; in the first case one is a Columbus,
in the second a god. Not to allow conscience to argue or the
will to fail—this is the way to suffering and glory. In the world
of ethics to fall does not exclude the possibility of soaring,
rather does it give impetus to flight. The mediocrities allow
themselves to be dissuaded by the specious obstacles—the great
ones never. To perish is their perhaps, to conquer their conviction.
You may propose many good reasons to the martyr
why he should not allow himself to be stoned to death. Disdain
of every reasonable objection begets that sublime victory of
the vanquished which we call martyrdom.</p>

<p>All his efforts seemed to tend to the impossible. His success
was trifling and slow. He was compelled to expend much
labour for very little results. This it was that gave to his
struggle its noble and pathetic character.</p>

<p>That it should have required so many preparations, so much
toil, so many cautious experiments, such nights of hardship,
and such days of danger, merely to set up four beams over a
shipwrecked vessel, to divide and isolate the portion that could
be saved, and to adjust to that wreck within a wreck four tackle-blocks
with their cables was only the result of his solitary
labour. Fate had decreed him the work, and necessity obliged
him to carry it out.</p>

<p>That solitary position Gilliatt had more than accepted; he
had deliberately chosen it. Dreading a competitor, because a
competitor might have proved a rival, he had sought for no
assistance. The overwhelming enterprise, the risk, the danger,
the toil multiplied by itself, the possible destruction of the
salvor in his work, famine, fever, nakedness, distress—he had
chosen all these for himself! Such was his selfishness. He
was like a man placed in some terrible chamber which is being
slowly exhausted of air. His vitality was leaving him by little
and little. He scarcely perceived it.</p>

<p>Exhaustion of the bodily strength does not necessarily
exhaust the will. Faith is only a secondary power; the will is
the first. The mountains, which faith is proverbially said to
move, are nothing beside that which the will can accomplish.
All that Gilliatt lost in vigour, he gained in tenacity. The
destruction of the physical man under the oppressive influence
of that wild surrounding sea, and rock, and sky, seemed only to
reinvigorate his moral nature.</p>

<p>Gilliatt felt no fatigue; or, rather, would not yield to any.
The refusal of the mind to recognise the failings of the body is
in itself an immense power.</p>

<p>He saw nothing, except the steps in the progress of his
labours.</p>

<p>His object—now seeming so near attainment—wrapped him
in perpetual illusions.</p>

<p>He endured all this suffering without any other thought than
is comprised in the word "Forward." His work flew to his
head; the strength of the will is intoxicating. Its intoxication
is called heroism.</p>

<p>He had become a kind of Job, having the ocean for the scene
of his sufferings. But he was a Job wrestling with difficulty, a
Job combating and making head against afflictions; a Job conquering!
a combination of Job and Prometheus, if such names
are not too great to be applied to a poor sailor and fisher of crabs
and crayfish.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>V</h4>

<h5>SUB UMBRA</h5>


<p>Sometimes in the night-time Gilliatt woke and peered into the
darkness.</p>

<p>He felt a strange emotion.</p>

<p>His eyes were opened upon the black night; the situation
was dismal; full of disquietude.</p>

<p>There is such a thing as the pressure of darkness.</p>

<p>A strange roof of shadow; a deep obscurity, which no diver
can explore; a light mingled with that obscurity, of a strange,
subdued, and sombre kind; floating atoms of rays, like a dust
of seeds or of ashes; millions of lamps, but no illumining; a
vast sprinkling of fire, of which no man knows the secret; a
diffusion of shining points, like a drift of sparks arrested in their
course; the disorder of the whirlwind, with the fixedness of death;
a mysterious and abyssmal depth; an enigma, at once showing
and concealing its face; the Infinite in its mask of darkness—these
are the synonyms of night. Its weight lies heavily on
the soul of man.</p>

<p>This union of all mysteries—the mystery of the Cosmos and
the mystery of Fate—oppresses human reason.</p>

<p>The pressure of darkness acts in inverse proportion upon
different kinds of natures. In the presence of night man feels
his own incompleteness. He perceives the dark void and is
sensible of infirmity. It is like the vacancy of blindness. Face
to face with night, man bends, kneels, prostrates himself, crouches
on the earth, crawls towards a cave, or seeks for wings. Almost
always he shrinks from that vague presence of the Infinite
Unknown. He asks himself what it is; he trembles and bows
the head. Sometimes he desires to go to it.</p>

<p>To go whither?</p>

<p>He can only answer, "Yonder."</p>

<p>But what is that? and what is there?</p>

<p>This curiosity is evidently forbidden to the spirit of man;
for all around him the roads which bridge that gulf are broken
up or gone. No arch exists for him to span the Infinite. But
there is attraction in forbidden knowledge, as in the edge of the
abyss. Where the footstep cannot tread, the eye may reach;
where the eye can penetrate no further, the mind may soar.
There is no man, however feeble or insufficient his resources,
who does not essay. According to his nature he questions or
recoils before that mystery. With some it has the effect of
repressing; with others it enlarges the soul. The spectacle is
sombre, indefinite.</p>

<p>Is the night calm and cloudless? It is then a depth of
shadow. Is it stormy? It is then a sea of cloud. Its limitless
deeps reveal themselves to us, and yet baffle our gaze: close
themselves against research, but open to conjecture. Its innumerable
dots of light only make deeper the obscurity beyond.
Jewels, scintillations, stars; existences revealed in the unknown
universes; dread defiances to man's approach; landmarks of
the infinite creation; boundaries there, where there are no
bounds; sea-marks impossible, and yet real, numbering the
fathoms of those infinite deeps. One microscopic glittering
point; then another; then another; imperceptible, yet enormous.
Yonder light is a focus; that focus is a star; that star
is a sun; that sun is a universe; that universe is nothing. For
all numbers are as zero in the presence of the Infinite.</p>

<p>These worlds, which yet are nothing, exist. Through this
fact we feel the difference which separates the <i>being nothing</i>
from the <i>not to be</i>.</p>

<p>The inaccessible joined to the inexplicable, such is the universe.
From the contemplation of the universe is evolved a sublime
phenomenon: the soul growing vast through its sense of wonder.
A reverent fear is peculiar to man; the beasts know no such
fear.</p>

<p>His intelligence becomes conscious in this august terror of its
own power and its own weakness.</p>

<p>Darkness has unity, hence arises horror; at the same time
it is complex, and hence terror. Its unity weighs on the spirit
and destroys all desire of resistance. Its complexity causes us
to look around on all sides; apparently we have reason to fear
sudden happenings. We yield and yet are on guard. We are
in presence of the whole, hence submission; and of the many,
hence defiance.</p>

<p>The unity of darkness contains a multiple, a mysterious
plurality—visible in matter, realised in thought. Silence rules
all; another reason for watchfulness.</p>

<p>Night—and he who writes this has said it elsewhere—is the
right and normal condition of that special part of creation to
which we belong. Light, brief of duration here as throughout
space, is but the nearness of a star. This universal, prodigious
night does not fulfil itself, without friction, and all such friction
in such a mechanism means what we call evil. We feel this
darkness to be evil, a latent denial of divine order, the implicit
blasphemy of the real rebelling against the ideal. Evil complicates,
by one knows not what hydra-headed monstrosity, the
vast, cosmic whole.</p>

<p>Everywhere it arises and resists.</p>

<p>It is the tempest, and hinders the hastening ship; it is chaos,
and trammels the birth of a world. Good is one; evil is ubiquitous.
Evil dislocates the logic of Life. It causes the bird to
devour the fly and the comet to destroy the planet. Evil is a
blot on the page of creation.</p>

<p>The darkness of night is full of vertiginous uncertainty.</p>

<p>Whoso would sound its depths is submerged, and struggles
therein.</p>

<p>What fatigue to be compared to this contemplation of
shadows. It is the study of annihilation.</p>

<p>There is no sure hold on which the soul may rest. There are
ports of departure, and no havens for arrival. The interlacing
of contradictory solutions; all the branches of doubt seen at
a glance; the ramifications of phenomena budding limitlessly
from some undefined impulse; laws intersecting each other; an
incomprehensible promiscuity causing the mineral to become
vegetable; the vegetable to rise to higher life; thought to
gather weight; love to shine and gravitation to attract; the
immense range presented to view by all questions, extending
itself into the limitless obscurity; the half seen, suggesting the
unknown; the cosmic correlation appearing clearly, not to
sight but to intelligence, in the vast, dim space; the invisible
become visible—these are the great overshadowing! Man
lives beneath it. He is ignorant of detail, but he carries, in
such proportion as he is able to bear, the weight of the
monstrous whole. This obsession prompted the astronomy
of the Chaldean shepherds. Involuntary revelations flow from
creation; hints of science fall from it unconsciously and are
absorbed by the ignorant. Every solitary, impregnated in this
mysterious way, becomes, without being aware of it, a natural
philosopher.</p>

<p>The darkness is indivisible. It is inhabited. Inhabited by
the changeless absolute; inhabited also by change. Action
exists there, disquieting thought! An awful creative will
works out its phases. Premeditations, Powers, fore-ordained
Destinies, elaborate there together an incommensurable work.
A life of horror and terror is hidden therein. There are vast
evolutions of suns; the stellar family, the planetary family;
zodiacal pollen; the <i>Quid Divinum</i> of currents; effluvia, polarisations,
and attractions; there are embraces and antagonisms;
a magnificent flux and reflux of universal antithesis; the imponderable,
free-floating around fixed centres; there is the sap
of globes and light beyond globes; the wandering atom, the
scattered germ, the processes of fecundity, meetings for union
and for combat; unimagined profusion, distances which are
as a dream, vertiginous orbits, the rush of worlds into the
incalculable; marvels following each other in the obscurity.
One mechanism works throughout in the breath of fleeing
spheres, and the wheels that we know are turning. The sage
conjectures; the ignorant man believes and trembles. These
things exist and yet are hidden; they are inexpugnable, beyond
reach, beyond approach.</p>

<p>We are convinced and oppressed—we feel, we know not what
dark evidence within us; we realise nothing, but are crushed by
the impalpable.</p>

<p>All is incomprehensible, but nothing is unintelligible.</p>

<p>And add to all that, the tremendous question: Is this immanent
universe a Being?</p>

<p>We exist beneath the shadow. We look; we listen. And
meanwhile the dark earth rolls onward. The flowers are conscious
of this tremendous motion; the one opens at eleven in
the evening and the other at five in the morning. Astounding
sense of law! And in other depths of wonder, the drop of
water is a world; the infusoria breed; animalculæ display
gigantic fecundity, the imperceptible reveals its grandeur, immensity
manifests itself, in an inverse sense; there are algæ
that produce in an hour thirteen hundred millions of their kind.
Every enigma is propounded in one. The irreducible is before
us. Hence we are constrained to some kind of faith. An
involuntary belief is the result. But belief does not ensure
peace of mind. Faith has an extraordinary desire to take
shape. Hence religions. Nothing is so overwhelming as a
formless faith.</p>

<p>And despite of thought or desire or inward resistance, to look
at the darkness is to fall into profound and wondering meditation.
What can we make of these phenomena! How should
we act beneath their united forces? To divide such weight of
oppression is impossible. What reverie can follow all these
mystic vistas? What abstruse revelations arise, stammering,
and are obscure from their very mass, as a hesitating speech.
Darkness is silence, but such a silence suggests everything.
One majestic thought is the result: God—God is the irrepressible
idea that springs within man's soul. Syllogisms, feuds,
negations, systems, religions cannot destroy it. This idea is
affirmed by the whole dark universe. Yet unrest is everywhere
in fearful immanence. The wondrous correlation of forces is
manifested in the upholding of the balanced darkness. The
universe is suspended and nothing falls. Incessant and immeasurable
changes operate without accident or destruction.
Man participates in the constant changes, and in experiencing
such he names them Destiny. But where does destiny begin?
And where does nature end? What difference is there between
an event and a season? between a sorrow and a rainfall?
between a virtue and a star? An hour, is it not a rolling wave?
The wheels of creation revolve mechanically regardless of man.
The starry sky is a vision of wheels, pendulums, and counterpoise.</p>

<p>He who contemplates it cannot but ponder upon it.</p>

<p>It is the whole reality and yet the whole abstraction. And
nothing more. We are in prison and at the mercy of the darkness,
and no evasion is possible.</p>

<p>We are an integral part of the working of this unknown
whole; and we feel the mystery within us fraternising with
the mystery beyond us. Hence the sublimity of Death. What
anguish! And yet what bliss to belong to the Infinite, and
through the sense of the Infinite to recognise our inevitable
immortality, the possibility of an eternity; to grasp amid this
prodigious deluge of universal life, the persistent, imperishable
<i>Me</i>; to look at the stars and say, The living soul within me is
akin to you; to gaze into darkness and cry, I am as unfathomable
as thou! Such immensity is of night, and, added to solitude,
weighed heavily on Gilliatt's mind.</p>

<p>Did he understand it? No.</p>

<p>Did he feel it? Yes.</p>

<p>All these vague imaginings, increased and intensified by
solitude, weighed upon Gilliatt.</p>

<p>He understood them little, but he felt them. His was a
powerful intellect clouded; a great spirit wild and untaught.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VI</h4>

<h5>GILLIATT PLACES THE SLOOP IN READINESS</h5>


<p>This rescue of the machinery of the wreck as meditated by
Gilliatt was, as we have already said, like the escape of a
criminal from a prison—necessitating all the patience and industry
recorded of such achievements; industry carried to the
point of a miracle, patience only to be compared with a long
agony. A certain prisoner named Thomas, at the Mont Saint
Michel, found means of secreting the greater part of a wall in
his paillasse. Another at Tulle, in 1820, cut away a quantity
of lead from the terrace where the prisoners walked for exercise.
With what kind of knife? No one would guess. And melted
this lead with what fire? None have ever discovered; but it is
known that he cast it in a mould made of the crumbs of bread.
With this lead and this mould he made a key, and with this key
succeeded in opening a lock of which he had never seen anything
but the keyhole. Some of this marvellous ingenuity Gilliatt
possessed. He had once climbed and descended from the cliff
at Boisrosé. He was the Baron Trenck of the wreck, and the
Latude of her machinery.</p>

<p>The sea, like a jailor, kept watch over him.</p>

<p>For the rest, mischievous and inclement as the rain had been,
he had contrived to derive some benefit from it. He had in
part replenished his stock of fresh water; but his thirst was
inextinguishable, and he emptied his can as fast as he filled it.</p>

<p>One day—it was on the last day of April or the first of May—all
was at length ready for his purpose.</p>

<p>The engine-room was, as it were, enclosed between the eight
cables hanging from the tackle-blocks, four on one side, four
on the other. The sixteen holes upon the deck and under the
keel, through which the cables passed, had been hooped round
by sawing. The planking had been sawed, the timber cut with
the hatchet, the ironwork with a file, the sheathing with the
chisel. The part of the keel immediately under the machinery
was cut squarewise, and ready to descend with it while still
supporting it. All this frightful swinging mass was held only
by one chain, which was itself only kept in position by a filed
notch. At this stage, in such a labour and so near its completion,
haste is prudence.</p>

<p>The water was low; the moment favourable.</p>

<p>Gilliatt had succeeded in removing the axle of the paddles,
the extremities of which might have proved an obstacle and
checked the descent. He had contrived to make this heavy
portion fast in a vertical position within the engine-room itself.</p>

<p>It was time to bring his work to an end. The workman, as
we have said, was not weary, for his will was strong; but his
tools were. The forge was by degrees becoming impracticable.
The blower had begun to work badly. The little hydraulic fall
being of sea-water, saline deposits had encrusted the joints of
the apparatus, and prevented its free action.</p>

<p>Gilliatt visited the creek of "The Man Rock," examined the
sloop, and assured himself that all was in good condition, particularly
the four rings fixed to starboard and to larboard; then
he weighed anchor, and worked the heavy barge-shaped craft
with the oars till he brought it alongside the two Douvres. The
defile between the rocks was wide enough to admit it. There
was also depth enough. On the day of his arrival he had
satisfied himself that it was possible to push the sloop under the
Durande.</p>

<p>The feat, however, was difficult; it required the minute precision
of a watchmaker. The operation was all the more delicate
from the fact that, for his objects, he was compelled to force it in
by the stern, rudder first. It was necessary that the mast and
the ringing of the sloop should project beyond the wreck in the
direction of the sea.</p>

<p>These embarrassments rendered all Gilliatt's operations
awkward. It was not like entering the creek of "The Man,"
where it was a mere affair of the tiller. It was necessary here
to push, drag, row, and take soundings all together. Gilliatt
consumed but a quarter of an hour in these manœuvres; but
he was successful.</p>

<p>In fifteen or twenty minutes the sloop was adjusted under
the wreck. It was almost wedged in there. By means of his
two anchors he moored the boat by head and stern. The
strongest of the two was placed so as to be efficient against the
strongest wind that blows, which was that from the south-west.
Then by the aid of a lever and the capstan, he lowered into the
sloop the two cases containing the pieces of the paddle-wheel,
the slings of which were all ready. The two cases served as
ballast.</p>

<p>Relieved of these encumbrances, he fastened to the hook of
the chain of the capstan the sling of the regulating tackle-gear,
intending to check the pulleys.</p>

<p>Owing to the peculiar objects of this labour, the defects of the
old sloop became useful qualities. It had no deck; her burden
therefore would have greater depth, and could rest upon the
hold. Her mast was very forward—too far forward indeed for
general purposes; her contents therefore would have more
room, and the mast standing thus beyond the mass of the wreck,
there would be nothing to hinder its disembarkation. It was
a mere shell, or case for receiving it; but nothing is more stable
than this on the sea.</p>

<p>While engaged in these operations, Gilliatt suddenly perceived
that the sea was rising. He looked around to see from what
quarter the wind was coming.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VII</h4>

<h5>SUDDEN DANGER</h5>


<p>The breeze was scarcely perceptible; but what there was came
from the west. A disagreeable habit of the winds during the
equinoxes.</p>

<p>The rising sea varies much in its effects upon the Douvres
rocks, depending upon the quarter of the wind.</p>

<p>According to the gale which drives them before it, the waves
enter the rocky corridor either from the east or from the west.
Entering from the east, the sea is comparatively gentle; coming
from the west, it is always furious. The reason of this is, that
the wind from the east blowing from the land has not had time
to gather force; while the westerly winds, coming from the
Atlantic, blow unchecked from a vast ocean. Even a very
slight breeze, if it comes from the west, is serious. It rolls the
huge billows from the illimitable space and dashes the waves
against the narrow defile in greater bulk than can find entrance
there.</p>

<p>A sea which rolls into a gulf is always terrible. It is the same
with a crowd of people: a multitude is a sort of fluid body.
When the quantity which can enter is less than the quantity
endeavouring to force a way, there is a fatal crush among the
crowd, a fierce convulsion on the water. As long as the west
wind blows, however slight the breeze, the Douvres are twice
a day subjected to that rude assault. The sea rises, the tide
breasts up, the narrow gullet gives little entrance, the waves,
driven against it violently, rebound and roar, and a tremendous
surf beats the two sides of the gorge. Thus the Douvres, during
the slightest wind from the west, present the singular spectacle
of a sea comparatively calm without, while within the rocks a
storm is raging. This tumult of waters, altogether confined and
circumscribed, has nothing of the character of a tempest. It is
a mere local outbreak among the waves, but a terrible one. As
regards the winds from the north and south, they strike the
rocks crosswise, and cause little surf in the passage. The
entrance by the east, a fact which must be borne in mind,
was close to "The Man Rock." The dangerous opening to the
west was at the opposite extremity, exactly between the two
Douvres.</p>

<p>It was at this western entrance that Gilliatt found himself
with the wrecked Durande, and the sloop made fast beneath it.</p>

<p>A catastrophe seemed inevitable. There was not much wind,
but it was sufficient for the impending mischief.</p>

<p>Before many hours, the swell which was rising would be
rushing with full force into the gorge of the Douvres. The first
waves were already breaking. This swell, and eddy of the
entire Atlantic, would have behind it the immense sea. There
would be no squall; no violence, but a simple overwhelming
wave, which commencing on the coasts of America, rolls towards
the shores of Europe with an impetus gathered over two thousand
leagues. This wave, a gigantic ocean barrier, meeting the
gap of the rocks, must be caught between the two Douvres,
standing like watch-towers at the entrance, or like pillars of the
defile. Thus swelled by the tide, augmented by resistance,
driven back by the shoals, and urged on by the wind, it would
strike the rock with violence, and with all the contortions from
the obstacles it had encountered, and all the frenzy of a sea
confined in limits, would rush between the rocky walls, where it
would reach the sloop and the Durande, and, in all probability,
destroy them.</p>

<p>A shield against this danger was wanting. Gilliatt had one.</p>

<p>The problem was to prevent the sea reaching it at one bound;
to obstruct it from striking, while allowing it to rise; to bar
the passage without refusing it admission; to prevent the compression
of the water in the gorge, which was the whole danger;
to turn an eruption into a simple flood; to extract as it were
from the waves all their violence, and constrain the furies to
be gentle; it was, in fact, to substitute an obstacle which will
appease, for an obstacle which irritates.</p>

<p>Gilliatt, with all that dexterity which he possessed, and which
is so much more efficient than mere force, sprang upon the rocks
like a chamois among the mountains or a monkey in the forest;
using for his tottering and dizzy strides the smallest projecting
stone; leaping into the water, and issuing from it again; swimming
among the shoals and clambering the rocks, with a rope
between his teeth and a mallet in his hand. Thus he detached
the cable which kept suspended and also fast to the basement
of the Little Douvre the end of the forward side of the Durande;
fashioned out of some ends of hawsers a sort of hinges, holding
this bulwark to the huge nails fixed in the granite; swung this
apparatus of planks upon them, like the gates of a great dock,
and turned their sides, as he would turn a rudder, outward to
the waves, which pushed the extremities upon the Great Douvre,
while the rope hinges detained the other extremities upon the
Little Douvre; next he contrived, by means of the huge nails
placed beforehand for the purpose, to fix the same kind of
fastenings upon the Great Douvre as on the little one; made
completely fast the vast mass of woodwork against the two
pillars of the gorge, slung a chain across this barrier like a
baldric upon a cuirass; and in less than an hour, this barricade
against the sea was complete and the gullet of the rocks closed
as by a folding-door.</p>

<p>This powerful apparatus, a heavy mass of beams and planks,
which laid flat would have made a raft, and upright formed a
wall, had by the aid of the water been handled by Gilliatt with
the adroitness of a juggler. It might almost have been said
that the obstruction was complete before the rising sea had the
time to perceive it.</p>

<p>It was one of those occasions on which Jean Bart would have
employed the famous expression which he applied to the sea
every time he narrowly escaped shipwreck. "We have cheated
the Englishman;" for it is well known that when that famous
admiral meant to speak contemptuously of the ocean he called
it "the Englishman."</p>

<p>The entrance to the defile being thus protected, Gilliatt
thought of the sloop. He loosened sufficient cable for the
two anchors to allow her to rise with the tide; an operation
similar to what the mariners of old called "<i>mouiller avec des
embossures</i>." In all this, Gilliatt was not taken the least by
surprise; the necessity had been foreseen. A seaman would
have perceived it by the two pulleys of the top ropes cut in the
form of snatch-blocks, and fixed behind the sloop, through
which passed two ropes, the ends of which were slung through
the rings of the anchors.</p>

<p>Meanwhile the tide was rising fast; the half flood had arrived,
a moment when the shock of the waves, even in comparatively
moderate weather, may become considerable. Exactly what
Gilliatt expected came to pass. The waves rolled violently
against the barrier, struck it, broke heavily and passed beneath.
Outside was the heavy swell; within, the waters ran quietly.
He had devised a sort of marine <i>Furculæ caudinæ</i>. The sea
was conquered.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VIII</h4>

<h5>MOVEMENT RATHER THAN PROGRESS</h5>


<p>The moment so long dreaded had come.</p>

<p>The problem now was to place the machinery in the bark.</p>

<p>Gilliatt remained thoughtful for some moments, holding the
elbow of his left arm in his right hand, and applying his left hand
to his forehead.</p>

<p>Then he climbed upon the wreck, one part of which, containing
the engine, was to be parted from it, while the other remained.</p>

<p>He severed the four slings which fixed the four chains from the
funnel on the larboard and the starboard sides. The slings
being only of cord, his knife served him well enough for this
purpose.</p>

<p>The four chains set free, hung down along the sides of the
funnel.</p>

<p>From the wreck he climbed up to the apparatus which he had
constructed, stamped with his feet upon the beams, inspected
the tackle-blocks, looked to the pulleys, handled the cables,
examined the eking-pieces, assured himself that the untarred
hemp was not saturated through, found that nothing was
wanting and nothing giving way; then springing from the
height of the suspending props on to the deck, he took up his
position near the capstan, in the part of the Durande which
he intended to leave jammed in between the two Douvres. This
was to be his post during his labours.</p>

<p>Earnest, but troubled with no impulses but what were useful
to his work, he took a final glance at the hoisting-tackle, then
seized a file and began to saw with it through the chain which
held the whole suspended.</p>

<p>The rasping of the file was audible amidst the roaring of the sea.</p>

<p>The chain from the capstan, attached to the regulating gear,
was within his reach, quite near his hand.</p>

<p>Suddenly there was a crash. The link which he was filing
snapped when only half cut through: the whole apparatus
swung violently. He had only just time sufficient to seize the
regulating gear.</p>

<p>The severed chain beat against the rock; the eight cables
strained; the huge mass, sawed and cut through, detached itself
from the wreck; the belly of the hull opened, and the iron
flooring of the engine-room was visible below the keel.</p>

<p>If he had not seized the regulating tackle at that instant it
would have fallen. But his powerful hand was there, and it
descended steadily.</p>

<p>When the brother of Jean Bart, Peter Bart, that powerful and
sagacious toper, that poor Dunkirk fisherman, who used to talk
familiarly with the Grand Admiral of France, went to the rescue
of the galley <i>Langeron</i>, in distress in the Bay of Ambleteuse,
endeavouring to save the heavy floating mass in the midst of the
breakers of that furious bay, he rolled up the mainsail, tied it
with sea-reeds, and trusted to the ties to break away of themselves,
and give the sail to the wind at the right moment. Just
so Gilliatt trusted to the breaking of the chain; and the same
eccentric feat of daring was crowned with the same success.</p>

<p>The tackle, taken in hand by Gilliatt, held out and worked
well. Its function, as will be remembered, was to moderate the
powers of the apparatus, thus reduced from many to one, by
bringing them into united action. The gear had some similarity
to a bridle of a bowline, except that instead of trimming a sail
it served to balance a complicated mechanism.</p>

<p>Erect, and with his hand upon the capstan, Gilliatt, so to speak,
was enabled to feel the pulse of the apparatus.</p>

<p>It was here that his inventive genius manifested itself.</p>

<p>A remarkable coincidence of forces was the result.</p>

<p>While the machinery of the Durande, detached in a mass,
was lowering to the sloop, the sloop rose slowly to receive it.
The wreck and the salvage vessel assisting each other in opposite
ways, saved half the labour of the operation.</p>

<p>The tide swelling quietly between the two Douvres raised the
sloop and brought it nearer to the Durande. The sea was more
than conquered; it was tamed and broken in. It became, in
fact, part and parcel of the organisation of power.</p>

<p>The rising waters lifted the vessel without any sort of shock,
gently, and almost with precaution, as one would handle
porcelain.</p>

<p>Gilliatt combined and proportioned the two labours, that of
the water and that of the apparatus; and standing steadfast
at the capstan, like some terrible statue obeyed by all the movement
around it at the same moment, regulated the slowness of
the descent by the slow rise of the sea.</p>

<p>There was no jerk given by the waters, no slip among the
tackle. It was a strange collaboration of all the natural forces
subdued. On one side, gravitation lowering the huge bulk, on
the other the sea raising the bark. The attraction of heavenly
bodies which causes the tide, and the attractive force of the
earth, which men call weight, seemed to conspire together to
aid his plans. There was no hesitation, no stoppage in their
service; under the dominance of mind these passive forces
became active auxiliaries. From minute to minute the work
advanced; the interval between the wreck and the sloop
diminished insensibly. The approach continued in silence, and
as in a sort of terror of the man who stood there. The elements
received his orders and fulfilled them.</p>

<p>Nearly at the moment when the tide ceased to raise it, the
cable ceased to slide. Suddenly, but without commotion, the
pulleys stopped. The vast machine had taken its place in the
bark, as if placed there by a powerful hand. It stood straight,
upright, motionless, firm. The iron floor of the engine-room
rested with its four corners evenly upon the hold.</p>

<p>The work was accomplished.</p>

<p>Gilliatt contemplated it, lost in thought.</p>

<p>He was not the spoiled child of success. He bent under the
weight of his great joy. He felt his limbs, as it were, sinking;
and contemplating his triumph, he, who had never been shaken
by danger, began to tremble.</p>

<p>He gazed upon the sloop under the wreck and at the machinery
in the sloop. He seemed to feel it hard to believe it true. It
might have been supposed that he had never looked forward to
that which he had accomplished. A miracle had been wrought
by his hands, and he contemplated it in bewilderment.</p>

<p>His reverie lasted but a short time.</p>

<p>Starting like one awakening from a deep sleep, he seized his
saw, cut the eight cables, separated now from the sloop, thanks
to the rising of the tide, by only about ten feet; sprang aboard,
took a bunch of cord, made four slings, passed them through the
rings prepared beforehand, and fixed on both sides aboard the
sloop the four chains of the funnel which only an hour before
had been still fastened to their places aboard the Durande.</p>

<p>The funnel being secured, he disengaged the upper part of
the machinery. A square portion of the planking of the
Durande was adhering to it; he struck off the nails and relieved
the sloop of this encumbrance of planks and beams; which fell
over on to the rocks—a great assistance in lightening it.</p>

<p>For the rest, the sloop, as has been foreseen, behaved well
under the burden of the machinery. It had sunk in the water,
but only to a good water-line. Although massive, the engine
of the Durande was less heavy than the pile of stones and the
cannon which he had once brought back from Herm in the
sloop.</p>

<p>All then was ended; he had only to depart.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>IX</h4>

<h5>A SLIP BETWEEN CUP AND LIP</h5>


<p>All was not ended.</p>

<p>To re-open the gorge thus closed by the portion of the Durande's
bulwarks, and at once to push out with the sloop beyond the
rocks, nothing could appear more clear and simple. On the
ocean every minute is urgent. There was little wind; scarcely
a wrinkle on the open sea. The afternoon was beautiful, and
promised a fine night. The sea, indeed, was calm, but the ebb
had begun. The moment was favourable for starting. There
would be the ebb-tide for leaving the Douvres; and the flood
would carry him into Guernsey. It would be possible to be at
St. Sampson's at daybreak.</p>

<p>But an unexpected obstacle presented itself. There was a
flaw in his arrangements which had baffled all his foresight.</p>

<p>The machinery was freed; but the chimney was not.</p>

<p>The tide, by raising the sloop to the wreck suspended in the
air, had diminished the dangers of the descent, and abridged the
labour. But this diminution of the interval had left the top of
the funnel entangled in the kind of gaping frame formed by the
open hull of the Durande. The funnel was held fast there as
between four walls.</p>

<p>The services rendered by the sea had been accompanied by
that unfortunate drawback. It seemed as if the waves, constrained
to obey, had avenged themselves by a malicious trick.</p>

<p>It is true that what the flood-tide had done, the ebb would
undo.</p>

<p>The funnel, which was rather more than three fathoms in
height, was buried more than eight feet in the wreck. The
water-level would fall about twelve feet. Thus the funnel descending
with the falling tide would have four feet of room to
spare, and would clear itself easily.</p>

<p>But how much time would elapse before that release would
be completed? Six hours.</p>

<p>In six hours it would be near midnight. What means would
there be of attempting to start at such an hour? What channel
could he find among all those breakers, so full of dangers even
by day? How was he to risk his vessel in the depth of black
night in that inextricable labyrinth, that ambuscade of shoals?</p>

<p>There was not help for it. He must wait for the morrow.
These six hours lost, entailed a loss of twelve hours at least.</p>

<p>He could not even advance the labour by opening the mouth
of the gorge. His breakwater was necessary against the next
tide.</p>

<p>He was compelled to rest. Folding his arms was almost the
only thing which he had not yet done since his arrival on the
rocks.</p>

<p>This forced inaction irritated, almost vexed him with himself,
as if it had been his fault. He thought "what would Déruchette
say of me if she saw me thus doing nothing?"</p>

<p>And yet this interval for regaining his strength was not unnecessary.</p>

<p>The sloop was now at his command; he determined to pass
the night in it.</p>

<p>He mounted once more to fetch his sheepskin upon the Great
Douvre; descended again, supped off a few limpets and
<i>châtaignes de mer</i>, drank, being very thirsty, a few draughts of
water from his can, which was nearly empty, enveloped himself
in the skin, the wool of which felt comforting, lay down like a
watch-dog beside the engine, drew his red cap over his eyes and
slept.</p>

<p>His sleep was profound. It was such sleep as men enjoy who
have completed a great labour.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>X</h4>

<h5>SEA-WARNINGS</h5>


<p>In the middle of the night he awoke suddenly and with a jerk
like the recoil of a spring.</p>

<p>He opened his eyes.</p>

<p>The Douvres, rising high over his head, were lighted up as by
the white glow of burning embers. Over all the dark escarpment
of the rock there was a light like the reflection of a fire.</p>

<p>Where could this fire come from?</p>

<p>It was from the water.</p>

<p>The aspect of the sea was extraordinary.</p>

<p>The water seemed a-fire. As far as the eye could reach,
among the reefs and beyond them, the sea ran with flame. The
flame was not red; it had nothing in common with the grand
living fires of volcanic craters or of great furnaces. There was
no sparkling, no glare, no purple edges, no noise. Long trails
of a pale tint simulated upon the water the folds of a winding-sheet.
A trembling glow was spread over the waves. It was
the spectre of a great fire, rather than the fire itself. It was in
some degree like the glow of unearthly flames lighting the inside
of a sepulchre. A burning darkness.</p>

<p>The night itself, dim, vast, and wide-diffused, was the fuel of
that cold flame. It was a strange illumination issuing out of
blindness. The shadows even formed part of that phantom-fire.</p>

<p>The sailors of the Channel are familiar with those indescribable
phosphorescences, full of warning for the navigator. They
are nowhere more surprising than in the "Great V," near Isigny.</p>

<p>By this light, surrounding objects lose their reality. A
spectral glimmer renders them, as it were, transparent. Rocks
become no more than outlines. Cables of anchors look like
iron bars heated to a white heat. The nets of the fishermen
beneath the water seem webs of fire. The half of the oar above
the waves is dark as ebony, the rest in the sea like silver. The
drops from the blades uplifted from the water fall in starry
showers upon the sea. Every boat leaves a furrow behind it
like a comet's tail. The sailors, wet and luminous, seem like
men in flames. If you plunge a hand into the water, you withdraw
it clothed in flame. The flame is dead, and is not felt.
Your arm becomes a firebrand. You see the forms of things in
the sea roll beneath the waves as in liquid fire. The foam
twinkles. The fish are tongues of fire, or fragments of the
forked lightning, moving in the depths.</p>

<p>The reflection of this brightness had passed over the closed
eyelids of Gilliatt in the sloop. It was this that had awakened
him.</p>

<p>His awakening was opportune.</p>

<p>The ebb tide had run out, and the waters were beginning to
rise again. The funnel, which had become disengaged during
his sleep, was about to enter again into the yawning hollow
above it.</p>

<p>It was rising slowly.</p>

<p>A rise of another foot would have entangled it in the wreck
again. A rise of one foot is equivalent to half-an-hour's tide.
If he intended, therefore, to take advantage of that temporary
deliverance once more within his reach, he had just half-an-hour
before him.</p>

<p>He leaped to his feet.</p>

<p>Urgent as the situation was, he stood for a few moments
meditative, contemplating the phosphorescence of the waves.</p>

<p>Gilliatt knew the sea in all its phases. Notwithstanding all
her tricks, and often as he had suffered from her terrors, he had
long been her companion. That mysterious entity which we
call the ocean had nothing in its secret thoughts which he could
not divine. Observation, meditation, and solitude, had given
him a quick perception of coming changes, of wind, or cloud, or
wave.</p>

<p>Gilliatt hastened to the top ropes and payed out some cable;
then being no longer held fast by the anchors, he seized the
boat-hook of the sloop, and pushed her towards the entrance to
the gorge some fathoms from the Durande, and quite near to
the breakwater. Here, as the Guernsey sailors say, it had
<i>du rang</i>. In less than ten minutes the sloop was withdrawn
from beneath the carcase of the wreck. There was no further
danger of the funnel being caught in a trap. The tide might
rise now.</p>

<p>And yet Gilliatt's manner was not that of one about to take
his departure.</p>

<p>He stood considering the light upon the sea once more; but
his thoughts were not of starting. He was thinking of how to
fix the sloop again, and how to fix it more firmly than ever,
though near to the exit from the defile.</p>

<p>Up to this time he had only used the two anchors of the sloop
and had not yet employed the little anchor of the Durande,
which he had found, as will be remembered, among the breakers.
This anchor had been deposited by him in readiness for any
emergency, in a corner of the sloop, with a quantity of hawsers,
and blocks of top-ropes, and his cable, all furnished beforehand
with large knots, which prevented its dragging. He now let
go this third anchor, taking care to fasten the cable to a rope,
one end of which was slung through the anchor ring, while the
other was attached to the windlass of the sloop. In this manner
he made a kind of triangular, triple anchorage, much stronger
than the moorings with two anchors. All this indicated keen
anxiety, and a redoubling of precautions. A sailor would have
seen in this operation something similar to an anchorage in bad
weather, when there is fear of a current which might carry the
vessel under the wind.</p>

<p>The phosphorescence which he had been observing, and upon
which his eye was now fixed once more, was threatening, but
serviceable at the same time. But for it he would have been
held fast locked in sleep, and deceived by the night. The strange
appearance upon the sea had awakened him, and made things
about him visible.</p>

<p>The light which it shed among the rocks was, indeed, ominous;
but disquieting as it appeared to be to Gilliatt, it had served to
show him the dangers of his position, and had rendered possible
his operations in extricating the sloop. Henceforth, whenever
he should be able to set sail, the vessel, with its freight of
machinery, would be free.</p>

<p>And yet the idea of departing was further than ever from his
mind. The sloop being fixed in its new position, he went in
quest of the strongest chain which he had in his store-cavern,
and attaching it to the nails driven into the two Douvres, he
fortified from within with this chain the rampart of planks and
beams, already protected from without by the cross chain. Far
from opening the entrance to the defile, he made the barrier
more complete.</p>

<p>The phosphorescence lighted him still, but it was diminishing.
The day, however, was beginning to break.</p>

<p>Suddenly he paused to listen.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>XI</h4>

<h5>A WORD TO THE WISE IS ENOUGH</h5>


<p>A feeble, indistinct sound seemed to reach his ear from somewhere
in the far distance.</p>

<p>At certain hours the great deeps give forth a murmuring noise.</p>

<p>He listened a second time. The distant noise recommenced.
Gilliatt shook his head like one who recognises at last something
familiar to him.</p>

<p>A few minutes later he was at the other extremity of the alley
between the rocks, at the entrance facing the east, which had
remained open until then, and by heavy blows of his hammer
was driving large nails into the sides of the gullet near "The
Man Rock," as he had done at the gullet of the Douvres.</p>

<p>The crevices of these rocks were prepared and well furnished
with timber, almost all of which was heart of oak. The rock
on this side being much broken up, there were abundant cracks,
and he was able to fix even more nails there than in the base of
the two Douvres.</p>

<p>Suddenly, and as if some great breath had passed over it, the
luminous appearance on the waters vanished. The twilight
becoming paler every moment, assumed its functions.</p>

<p>The nails being driven, Gilliatt dragged beams and cords,
and then chains to the spot; and without taking his eyes off
his work, or permitting his mind to be diverted for a moment,
he began to construct across the gorge of "The Man" with
beams fixed horizontally, and made fast by cables, one of those
open barriers which science has now adopted under the name of
breakwaters.</p>

<p>Those who have witnessed, for example, at La Rocquaine in
Guernsey, or at Bourg-d'Eau in France, the effect produced by
a few posts fixed in the rock, will understand the power of these
simple preparations. This sort of breakwater is a combination
of what is called in France <i>épi</i> with what is known in England
as "a dam." The breakwater is the chevaux-de-frise of fortifications
against tempests. Man can only struggle against the
sea by taking advantage of this principle of dividing its forces.</p>

<p>Meanwhile, the sun had risen, and was shining brightly. The
sky was clear, the sea calm.</p>

<p>Gilliatt pressed on his work. He, too, was calm; but there
was anxiety in his haste. He passed with long strides from
rock to rock, and returned dragging wildly sometimes a rider,
sometimes a binding strake. The utility of all this preparation
of timbers now became manifest. It was evident that he was
about to confront a danger which he had foreseen.</p>

<p>A strong iron bar served him as a lever for moving the beams.</p>

<p>The work was executed so fast that it was rather a rapid
growth than a construction. He who has never seen a military
pontooner at his work can scarcely form an idea of this rapidity.</p>

<p>The eastern gullet was still narrower than the western.
There were but five or six feet of interval between the rocks.
The smallness of this opening was an assistance. The space to
be fortified and closed up being very little, the apparatus would
be stronger, and might be more simple. Horizontal beams,
therefore, sufficed, the upright ones being useless.</p>

<p>The first cross pieces of the breakwater being fixed, Gilliatt
mounted upon them and listened once more.</p>

<p>The murmurs had become significant.</p>

<p>He continued his construction. He supported it with the
two cat-heads of the Durande, bound to the frame of beams by
cords passed through the three pulley-sheaves. He made the
whole fast by chains.</p>

<p>The construction was little more than a colossal hurdle,
having beams for rods and chains in the place of wattles.</p>

<p>It seemed woven together, quite as much as built.</p>

<p>He multiplied the fastenings, and added nails where they
were necessary.</p>

<p>Having obtained a great quantity of bar iron from the
wreck, he had been able to make a large number of these heavy
nails.</p>

<p>While still at work, he broke some biscuit with his teeth. He
was thirsty, but he could not drink, having no more fresh water.
He had emptied the can at his meal of the evening before.</p>

<p>He added afterwards four or five more pieces of timber; then
climbed again upon the barrier and listened.</p>

<p>The noises from the horizon had ceased; all was still.</p>

<p>The sea was smooth and quiet; deserving all those complimentary
phrases which worthy citizens bestow upon it when
satisfied with a trip. "A mirror," "a pond," "like oil," and so
forth. The deep blue of the sky responded to the deep green
tint of the ocean. The sapphire and the emerald hues vied
with each other. Each were perfect. Not a cloud on high,
not a line of foam below. In the midst of all this splendour,
the April sun rose magnificently. It was impossible to imagine
a lovelier day.</p>

<p>On the verge of the horizon a flight of birds of passage formed
a long dark line against the sky. They were flying fast as if
alarmed.</p>

<p>Gilliatt set to work again to raise the breakwater.</p>

<p>He raised it as high as he could; as high, indeed, as the
curving of the rocks would permit.</p>

<p>Towards noon the sun appeared to him to give more than its
usual warmth. Noon is the critical time of the day. Standing
upon the powerful frame which he had built up, he paused
again to survey the wide expanse.</p>

<p>The sea was more than tranquil. It was a dull dead calm.
No sail was visible. The sky was everywhere clear; but from
blue it had become white. The whiteness was singular. To
the west, and upon the horizon, was a little spot of a sickly hue.
The spot remained in the same place, but by degrees grew
larger. Near the breakers the waves shuddered; but very
gently.</p>

<p>Gilliatt had done well to build his breakwater.</p>

<p>A tempest was approaching.</p>

<p>The elements had determined to give battle.</p>



