<h4>I</h4>

<h5>CONVERSATIONS AT THE JEAN AUBERGE</h5>


<p>Sieur Clubin was a man who bided his time. He was short
in stature, and his complexion was yellow. He had the strength
of a bull. His sea life had not tanned his skin; his flesh had a
sallow hue; it was the colour of a wax candle, of which his eyes,
too, had something of the steady light. His memory was
peculiarly retentive. With him, to have seen a man once, was
to have him like a note in a note-book. His quiet glance took
possession of you. The pupil of his eye received the impression
of a face, and kept it like a portrait. The face might grow old,
but Sieur Clubin never lost it; it was impossible to cheat that
tenacious memory. Sieur Clubin was curt in speech, grave in
manner, bold in action. No gestures were ever indulged in by
him. An air of candour won everybody to him at first; many
people thought him artless. He had a wrinkle in the corner of
his eye, astonishingly expressive of simplicity. As we have
said, no abler mariner existed; no one like him for reefing a sail,
for keeping a vessel's head to the wind, or the sails well set.
Never did reputation for religion and integrity stand higher
than his. To have suspected him would have been to bring
yourself under suspicion. He was on terms of intimacy with
Monsieur Rébuchet, a money-changer at St. Malo, who lived
in the Rue St. Vincent, next door to the armourer's; and
Monsieur Rébuchet would say, "I would leave my shop in
Clubin's hands."</p>

<p>Sieur Clubin was a widower; his wife, like himself, had
enjoyed a high reputation for probity. She had died with a
fame for incorruptible virtue. If the bailli had whispered
gallant things in her ear, she would have impeached him before
the king. If a saint had made love to her, she would have told
it to the priest. This couple, Sieur and Dame Clubin, had
realised in Torteval the ideal of the English epithet "respectable."
Dame Clubin's reputation was as the snowy whiteness
of the swan; Sieur Clubin's like that of ermine itself—a spot
would have been fatal to him. He could hardly have picked
up a pin without making inquiries for the owner. He would
send round the town-crier about a box of matches. One day
he went into a wine-shop at St. Servan, and said to the man who
kept it, "Three years ago I breakfasted here; you made a
mistake in the bill;" and he returned the man thirteen sous.
He was the very personification of probity, with a certain
compression of the lips indicative of watchfulness.</p>

<p>He seemed, indeed, always on the watch—for what? For
rogues probably.</p>

<p>Every Tuesday he commanded the Durande on her passage
from Guernsey to St. Malo. He arrived at St. Malo on the
Tuesday evening, stayed two days there to discharge and take
in a new cargo, and started again for Guernsey on Friday
morning.</p>

<p>There was at that period, at St. Malo, a little tavern near the
harbour, which was called the "Jean Auberge."</p>

<p>The construction of the modern quays swept away this
house. At this period, the sea came up as far as the St. Vincent
and Dinan gates. St. Merlan and St. Servan communicated
with each other by covered carts and other vehicles, which
passed to and fro among vessels lying high and dry, avoiding
the buoys, the anchors, and cables, and running the risk now
and then of smashing their leathern hoods against the lowered
yards, or the end of a jibboom. Between the tides, the coachmen
drove their horses over those sands, where, six hours afterwards,
the winds would be beating the rolling waves. The
four-and-twenty carrying dogs of St. Malo, who tore to pieces
a naval officer in 1770, were accustomed to prowl about this
beach. This excess of zeal on their part led to the destruction
of the pack. Their nocturnal barkings are no longer heard
between the little and the great Talard.</p>

<p>Sieur Clubin was accustomed to stay at the Jean Auberge.
The French office of the Durande was held there.</p>

<p>The custom-house officers and coast-guardmen came to take
their meals and to drink at the Jean Auberge. They had their
separate tables. The custom-house officers of Binic found it
convenient for the service to meet there with their brother
officers of St. Malo.</p>

<p>Captains of vessels came there also; but they ate at another
table.</p>

<p>Sieur Clubin sat sometimes at one, sometimes at the other
table, but preferred the table of the custom-house men to that
of the sea captains. He was always welcome at either.</p>

<p>The tables were well served. There were strange drinks
especially provided for foreign sailors. A dandy sailor from
Bilboa could have been supplied there with a <i>helada</i>. People
drank stout there, as at Greenwich; or brown <i>gueuse</i>, as at
Antwerp.</p>

<p>Masters of vessels who came from long voyages and privateersmen
sometimes appeared at the captains' table, where they
exchanged news. "How are sugars? That commission is
only for small lots.—The brown kinds, however, are going off.
Three thousand bags of East India, and five hundred hogsheads
of Sagua.—Take my word, the opposition will end by defeating
Villèle.—What about indigo? Only seven serons of Guatemala
changed hands.—The <i>Nanino-Julia</i> is in the roads; a pretty
three-master from Brittany.—The two cities of La Plata are at
loggerheads again.—When Monte Video gets fat, Buenos Ayres
grows lean.—It has been found necessary to transfer the cargo
of the <i>Regina-Cœli</i>, which has been condemned at Callao.—Cocoas
go off briskly.—Caraque bags are quoted at one hundred
and thirty-four, and Trinidad's at seventy-three.—It appears
that at the review in the Champ de Mars, the people cried,
'Down with the ministers!'—The raw salt Saladeros hides are
selling—ox-hides at sixty francs, and cows' at forty-eight.—Have
they passed the Balkan?—What is Diebitsch about?—Aniseed
is in demand at San Francisco. Plagniol olive oil is
quiet.—Gruyère cheese, in bulk, is thirty-two francs the quintal.—Well,
is Leon XII. dead?" etc., etc.</p>

<p>All these things were talked about and commented on aloud.
At the table of the custom-house and coast-guard officers they
spoke in a lower key.</p>

<p>Matters of police and revenue on the coast and in the ports
require, in fact, a little more privacy, and a little less clearness
in the conversation.</p>

<p>The sea-captains' table was presided over by an old captain
of a large vessel, M. Gertrais-Gaboureau. M. Gertrais-Gaboureau
could hardly be regarded as a man; he was rather a
living barometer. His long life at sea had given him a surprising
power of prognosticating the state of the weather. He seemed
to issue a decree for the weather to-morrow. He sounded the
winds, and felt the pulse, as it were, of the tides. He might be
imagined requesting the clouds to show their tongue—that is to
say, their forked lightnings. He was the physician of the wave,
the breeze, and the squall. The ocean was his patient. He had
travelled round the world like a doctor going his visits, examining
every kind of climate in its good and bad condition. He
was profoundly versed in the pathology of the seasons.
Sometimes he would be heard delivering himself in this fashion—"The
barometer descended in 1796 to three degrees below
tempest point." He was a sailor from real love of the sea. He
hated England as much as he liked the ocean. He had carefully
studied English seamanship, and considered himself to have
discovered its weak point. He would explain how the <i>Sovereign</i>
of 1637 differed from the <i>Royal William</i> of 1670, and from the
<i>Victory</i> of 1775. He compared their build as to their forecastles
and quarter-decks. He looked back with regret to the
towers upon the deck, and the funnel-shaped tops of the <i>Great
Harry</i> of 1514—probably regarding them from the point of
view of convenient lodging-places for French cannon-balls. In
his eyes, nations only existed for their naval institutions. He
indulged in some odd figures of speech on this subject. He
considered the term "The Trinity House" as sufficiently indicating
England. The "Northern Commissioners" were in
like manner synonymous in his mind with Scotland; the
"Ballast Board," with Ireland. He was full of nautical information.
He was, in himself, a marine alphabet and almanack,
a tariff and low-water mark, all combined. He knew by heart
all the lighthouse dues—particularly those of the English coast—one
penny per ton for passing before this; one farthing before
that. He would tell you that the Small Rock Light which once
used to burn two hundred gallons of oil, now consumes fifteen
hundred. Once, aboard ship, he was attacked by a dangerous
disease, and was believed to be dying. The crew assembled
round his hammock, and in the midst of his groans and agony
he addressed the chief carpenter with the words, "You had
better make a mortise in each side of the main caps, and put in
a bit of iron to help pass the top ropes through." His habit
of command had given to his countenance an expression of
authority.</p>

<p>It was rare that the subjects of conversation at the captains'
table and at that of the custom-house men were the same.
This, however, did happen to be the case in the first days of
that month of February to which the course of this history has
now brought us. The three-master <i>Tamaulipas</i>, Captain Zuela,
arrived from Chili, and bound thither again, was the theme of
discussion at both tables.</p>

<p>At the captains' table they were talking of her cargo; and
at that of the custom-house people, of certain circumstances
connected with her recent proceedings.</p>

<p>Captain Zuela, of Copiapo, was partly a Chilian and partly a
Columbian. He had taken a part in the War of Independence
in a true independent fashion, adhering sometimes to Bolivar,
sometimes to Morillo, according as he had found it to his interest.
He had enriched himself by serving all causes. No man in the
world could have been more Bourbonist, more Bonapartist,
more absolutist, more liberal, more atheistical, or more devoutly
catholic. He belonged to that great and renowned party which
may be called the Lucrative party. From time to time he
made his appearance in France on commercial voyages; and if
report spoke truly, he willingly gave a passage to fugitives of
any kind—bankrupts or political refugees, it was all the same
to him, provided they could pay. His mode of taking them
aboard was simple. The fugitive waited upon a lonely point of
the coast, and at the moment of setting sail, Zuela would detach
a small boat to fetch him. On his last voyage he had assisted
in this way an outlaw and fugitive from justice, named Berton;
and on this occasion he was suspected of being about to aid the
flight of the men implicated in the affair of the Bidassoa. The
police were informed, and had their eye upon him.</p>

<p>This period was an epoch of flights and escapes. The Restoration
in France was a reactionary movement. Revolutions
are fruitful of voluntary exile; and restorations of wholesale
banishments. During the first seven or eight years which
followed the return of the Bourbons, panic was universal—in
finance, in industry, in commerce, men felt the ground tremble
beneath them. Bankruptcies were numerous in the commercial
world; in the political, there was a general rush to escape.
Lavalette had taken flight, Lefebvre Desnouettes had taken
flight, Delon had taken flight. Special tribunals were again in
fashion—<i>plus</i> Treetaillon. People instinctively shunned the
Pont de Saumur, the Esplanade de la Réole, the wall of the
Observatoire in Paris, the tower of Taurias d'Avignon—dismal
landmarks in history where the period of reaction has left its
sign-spots, on which the marks of that blood-stained hand are
still visible. In London the Thistlewood affair, with its ramifications
in France: in Paris the Trogoff trial, with its ramifications
in Belgium, Switzerland, and Italy, had increased the
motives for anxiety and flight, and given an impetus to that
mysterious rout which left so many gaps in the social system of
that day. To find a place of safety, this was the general care.
To be implicated was to be ruined. The spirit of the military
tribunals had survived their institution. Sentences were
matters of favour. People fled to Texas, to the Rocky Mountains,
to Peru, to Mexico. The men of the Loire, traitors then,
but now regarded as patriots, had founded the <i>Champ d'Asile</i>.
Béranger in one of his songs says—</p>

<p><span style="margin-left: 8em;">"Barbarians! we are Frenchmen born;</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 8em;">Pity us, glorious, yet forlorn."</span></p>

<p>Self-banishment was the only resource left. Nothing, perhaps,
seems simpler than flight, but that monosyllable has a
terrible significance. Every obstacle is in the way of the man
who slips away. Taking to flight necessitates disguise. Persons
of importance—even illustrious characters—were reduced to
these expedients, only fit for malefactors. Their independent
habits rendered it difficult for them to escape through the
meshes of authority. A rogue who violates the conditions of
his ticket-of-leave comports himself before the police as innocently
as a saint; but imagine innocence constrained to act a
part; virtue disguising its voice; a glorious reputation hiding
under a mask. Yonder passer-by is a man of well-earned celebrity;
he is in quest of a false passport. The equivocal proceedings
of one absconding from the reach of the law is no proof
that he is not a hero. Ephemeral but characteristic features of
the time of which our so-called regular history takes no note,
but which the true painter of the age will bring out into relief.
Under cover of these flights and concealments of honest men,
genuine rogues, less watched and suspected, managed often to
get clear off. A scoundrel, who found it convenient to disappear,
would take advantage of the general pell-mell, tack
himself on to the political refugees, and, thanks to his greater
skill in the art, would contrive to appear in that dim twilight
more honest even than his honest neighbours. Nothing looks
more awkward and confused sometimes than honesty unjustly
condemned. It is out of its element, and is almost sure to
commit itself.</p>

<p>It is a curious fact, that this voluntary expatriation, particularly
with honest folks, appeared to lead to every strange turn
of fortune. The modicum of civilisation which a scamp brought
with him from London or Paris became, perhaps, a valuable
stock in trade in some primitive country, ingratiated him with
the people, and enabled him to strike into new paths. There
is nothing impossible in a man's escaping thus from the laws,
to reappear elsewhere as a dignitary among the priesthood.
There was something phantasmagorial in these sudden disappearances;
and more than one such flight has led to events like
the marvels of a dream. An escapade of this kind, indeed,
seemed to end naturally in the wild and wonderful; as when
some broken bankrupt suddenly decamps to turn up again
twenty years later as Grand Vizier to the Mogul, or as a king in
Tasmania.</p>

<p>Rendering assistance to these fugitives was an established
trade, and, looking to the abundance of business of that kind,
was a highly profitable one. It was generally carried on as a
supplementary branch of certain recognised kinds of commerce.
A person, for instance, desiring to escape to England, applied
to the smugglers; one who desired to get to America, had recourse
to sea-captains like Zuela.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>II</h4>

<h5>CLUBIN OBSERVES SOMEONE</h5>


<p>Zuela came sometimes to take refreshment at the Jean Auberge.
Clubin knew him by sight.</p>

<p>For that matter Clubin was not proud. He did not disdain
even to know scamps by sight. He went so far sometimes as to
cultivate even a closer acquaintance with them; giving his hand
in the open street, or saying good-day to them. He talked
English with the smugglers, and jabbered Spanish with the <i>contrebandistas</i>.
On this subject he had at command a number of
apologetic phrases. "Good," he said, "can be extracted out
of the knowledge of evil. The gamekeeper may find advantage
in knowing the poacher. The good pilot may sound the depths
of a pirate, who is only a sort of hidden rock. I test the quality
of a scoundrel as a doctor will test a poison." There was no
answering a battery of proverbs like this. Everybody gave
Clubin credit for his shrewdness. People praised him for not
indulging in a ridiculous delicacy. Who, then, should dare to
speak scandal of him on this point? Everything he did was
evidently "for the good of the service." With him, all was
straightforward. Nothing could stain his good fame. Crystal
might more easily become sullied. This general confidence in
him was the natural reward of a long life of integrity, the crowning
advantage of a settled reputation. Whatever Clubin might
do, or appear to do, was sure to be interpreted favourably. He
had attained almost to a state of impeccability. Over and
above this, "he is very wary," people said: and from a situation
which in others would have given rise to suspicion, his integrity
would extricate itself, with a still greater halo of reputation
for ability. This reputation for ability mingled harmoniously
with his fame for perfect simplicity of character. Great simplicity
and great talents in conjunction are not uncommon.
The compound constitutes one of the varieties of the virtuous
man, and one of the most valuable. Sieur Clubin was one of
those men who might be found in intimate conversation with
a sharper or a thief, without suffering any diminution of respect
in the minds of their neighbours.</p>

<p>The <i>Tamaulipas</i> had completed her loading. She was ready
for sea, and was preparing to sail very shortly.</p>

<p>One Tuesday evening the Durande arrived at St. Malo while
it was still broad daylight. Sieur Clubin, standing upon the
bridge of the vessel, and superintending the manœuvres necessary
for getting her into port, perceived upon the sandy beach
near the Petit-Bey, two men, who were conversing between the
rocks, in a solitary spot. He observed them with his sea-glass,
and recognised one of the men. It was Captain Zuela. He
seemed to recognise the other also.</p>

<p>This other was a person of high stature, a little grey. He
wore the broad-brimmed hat and the sober clothing of the
Society of Friends. He was probably a Quaker. He lowered
his gaze with an air of extreme diffidence.</p>

<p>On arriving at the Jean Auberge, Sieur Clubin learnt that the
<i>Tamaulipas</i> was preparing to sail in about ten days.</p>

<p>It has since become known that he obtained information on
some other points.</p>

<p>That night he entered the gunsmith's shop in the St. Vincent
Street, and said to the master:</p>

<p>"Do you know what a revolver is?"</p>

<p>"Yes," replied the gunsmith. "It is an American weapon."</p>

<p>"It is a pistol with which a man can carry on a conversation."</p>

<p>"Exactly: an instrument which comprises in itself both the
question and the answer."</p>

<p>"And the rejoinder too."</p>

<p>"Precisely, Monsieur Clubin. A rotatory clump of barrels."</p>

<p>"I shall want five or six balls."</p>

<p>The gunmaker twisted the corner of his lip, and made that
peculiar noise with which, when accompanied by a toss of the
head, Frenchmen express admiration.</p>

<p>"The weapon is a good one, Monsieur Clubin."</p>

<p>"I want a revolver with six barrels."</p>

<p>"I have not one."</p>

<p>"What! and you a gunmaker!"</p>

<p>"I do not keep such articles yet. You see, it is a new thing.
It is only just coming into vogue. French makers, as yet,
confine themselves to the simple pistol."</p>

<p>"Nonsense."</p>

<p>"It has not yet become an article of commerce."</p>

<p>"Nonsense, I say."</p>

<p>"I have excellent pistols."</p>

<p>"I want a revolver."</p>

<p>"I agree that it is more useful. Stop, Monsieur Clubin!"</p>

<p>"What?"</p>

<p>"I believe I know where there is one at this moment in St.
Malo; to be had a bargain."</p>

<p>"A revolver?"</p>

<p>"Yes."</p>

<p>"For sale?"</p>

<p>"Yes."</p>

<p>"Where is that?"</p>

<p>"I believe I know; or I can find out."</p>

<p>"When can you give me an answer?"</p>

<p>"A bargain; but of good quality."</p>

<p>"When shall I return?"</p>

<p>"If I procure you a revolver, remember, it will be a good one."</p>

<p>"When will you give me an answer?"</p>

<p>"After your next voyage."</p>

<p>"Do not mention that it is for me," said Clubin.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>III</h4>

<h5>CLUBIN CARRIES AWAY SOMETHING AND BRINGS BACK NOTHING</h5>


<p>Sieur Clubin completed the loading of the Durande, embarked
a number of cattle and some passengers, and left St. Malo for
Guernsey, as usual, on the Friday morning.</p>

<p>On that same Friday, when the vessel had gained the open,
which permits the captain to absent himself a moment from
the place of command, Clubin entered his cabin, shut himself
in, took a travelling bag which he kept there, put into one of its
compartments some biscuit, some boxes of preserves, a few
pounds of chocolate in sticks, a chronometer, and a sea telescope,
and passed through the handles a cord, ready prepared
to sling it if necessary. Then he descended into the hold, went
into the compartment where the cables are kept, and was seen
to come up again with one of those knotted ropes heavy with
pieces of metal, which are used for ship caulkers at sea and by
robbers ashore. Cords of this kind are useful in climbing.</p>

<p>Having arrived at Guernsey, Clubin repaired to Torteval.
He took with him the travelling bag and the knotted cord, but
did not bring them back again.</p>

<p>Let us repeat once for all, the Guernsey which we are describing
is that ancient Guernsey which no longer exists, and of
which it would be impossible to find a parallel now anywhere
except in the country. There it is still flourishing, but in the
towns it has passed away. The same remarks apply to Jersey.
St. Helier's is as civilised as Dieppe, St. Peter's Port as L'Orient.
Thanks to the progress of civilisation, thanks to the admirably
enterprising spirit of that brave island people, everything has
been changed during the last forty years in the Norman Archipelago.
Where there was darkness there is now light. With
these premises let us proceed.</p>

<p>At that period, then, which is already so far removed from us
as to have become historical, smuggling was carried on very
extensively in the Channel. The smuggling vessels abounded,
particularly on the western coast of Guernsey. People of that
peculiarly clever kind who know, even in the smallest details,
what went on half a century ago, will even cite you the names of
these suspicious craft, which were almost always Austrians or
Guiposeans. It is certain that a week scarcely ever passed
without one or two being seen either in Saint's Bay or at Pleinmont.
Their coming and going had almost the character of a
regular service. A cavern in the cliffs at Sark was called then,
and is still called, the "Shops" ("Les Boutiques"), from its
being the place where these smugglers made their bargains with
the purchasers of their merchandise. This sort of traffic had
in the Channel a dialect of its own, a vocabulary of contraband
technicalities now forgotten, and which was to the Spanish
what the "Levantine" is to the Italian.</p>

<p>On many parts of the English coast smuggling had a secret
but cordial understanding with legitimate and open commerce.
It had access to the house of more than one great financier, by
the back-stairs it is true; and its influence extended itself
mysteriously through all the commercial world, and the intricate
ramifications of manufacturing industry. Merchant on one side,
smuggler on the other; such was the key to the secret of many
great fortunes. Séguin affirmed it of Bourgain, Bourgain of
Séguin. We do not vouch for their accusations; it is possible
that they were calumniating each other. However this may
have been, it is certain that the contraband trade, though
hunted down by the law, was flourishing enough in certain financial
circles. It had relations with "the very best society."
Thus the brigand Mandrin, in other days, found himself occasionally
<i>tête-à-tête</i> with the Count of Charolais; for this underhand
trade often contrived to put on a very respectable appearance;
kept a house of its own with an irreproachable exterior.</p>

<p>All this necessitated a host of manœuvres and connivances,
which required impenetrable secrecy. A contrabandist was
entrusted with a good many things, and knew how to keep
them secret. An inviolable confidence was the condition of his
existence. The first quality, in fact, in a smuggler was strict
honour in his own circle. No discreetness, no smuggling.
Fraud has its secrets like the priest's confessional.</p>

<p>These secrets were indeed, as a rule, faithfully kept. The
contrabandist swore to betray nothing, and he kept his word;
nobody was more trustworthy than the genuine smuggler.
The Judge Alcade of Oyarzun captured a smuggler one day,
and put him to torture to compel him to disclose the name of
the capitalist who secretly supported him. The smuggler
refused to tell. The capitalist in question was the Judge
Alcade himself. Of these two accomplices, the judge and the
smuggler, the one had been compelled, in order to appear in
the eyes of the world to fulfil the law, to put the other to the
torture, which the other had patiently borne for the sake of
his oath.</p>

<p>The two most famous smugglers who haunted Pleinmont at
that period were Blasco and Blasquito. They were <i>Tocayos</i>.
This was a sort of Spanish or Catholic relationship which consisted
in having the same patron saint in heaven; a thing, it
will be admitted, not less worthy of consideration than having
the same father upon earth.</p>

<p>When a person was initiated into the furtive ways of the
contraband business, nothing was more easy, or, from a certain
point of view, more troublesome. It was sufficient to have no
fear of dark nights, to repair to Pleinmont, and to consult the
oracle located there.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>IV</h4>

<h5>PLEINMONT</h5>


<p>Pleinmont, near Torteval, is one of the three corners of the
island of Guernsey. At the extremity of the cape there rises
a high turfy hill, which looks over the sea.</p>

<p>The height is a lonely place. All the more lonely from there
being one solitary house there.</p>

<p>This house adds a sense of terror to that of solitude.</p>

<p>It is popularly believed to be haunted.</p>

<p>Haunted or not, its aspect is singular.</p>

<p>Built of granite, and rising only one story high, it stands in
the midst of the grassy solitude. It is in a perfectly good condition
as far as exterior is concerned; the walls are thick and
the roof is sound. Not a stone is wanting in the sides, not a tile
upon the roof. A brick-built chimney-stack forms the angle
of the roof. The building turns its back to the sea, being on
that side merely a blank wall. On examining this wall, however,
attentively, the visitor perceives a little window bricked up.
The two gables have three dormer windows, one fronting the
east, the others fronting the west, but both are bricked up in
like manner. The front, which looks inland, has alone a door
and windows. This door, too, is walled in, as are also the two
windows of the ground-floor. On the first floor—and this is the
feature which is most striking as you approach—there are two
open windows; but these are even more suspicious than the
blind windows. Their open squares look dark even in broad
day, for they have no panes of glass, or even window-frames.
They open simply upon the dusk within. They strike the
imagination like hollow eye-sockets in a human face. Inside
all is deserted. Through the gaping casements you may mark
the ruin within. No panellings, no woodwork; all bare stone.
It is like a windowed sepulchre, giving liberty to the spectres to
look out upon the daylight world. The rains sap the foundations
on the seaward side. A few nettles, shaken by the breeze,
flourish in the lower part of the walls. Far around the horizon
there is no other human habitation. The house is a void; the
abode of silence: but if you place your ear against the wall and
listen, you may distinguish a confused noise now and then, like
the flutter of wings. Over the walled door, upon the stone which
forms its architrave, are sculptured these letters, "<span class="smcap">Elm-Pbilg</span>,"
with the date "1780."</p>

<p>The dark shadow of night and the mournful light of the
moon find entrance there.</p>

<p>The sea completely surrounds the house. Its situation is
magnificent; but for that reason its aspect is more sinister.
The beauty of the spot becomes a puzzle. Why does not a
human family take up its abode here? The place is beautiful,
the house well-built. Whence this neglect? To these questions,
obvious to the reason, succeed others, suggested by the
reverie which the place inspires. Why is this cultivatable
garden uncultivated? No master for it; and the bricked-up
doorway? What has happened to the place? Why is it
shunned by men? What business is done here? If none, why
is there no one here? Is it only when all the rest of the world
are asleep that some one in this spot is awake? Dark squalls,
wild winds, birds of prey, strange creatures, unknown forms, present
themselves to the mind, and connect themselves somehow
with this deserted house. For what class of wayfarers can this
be the hostelry? You imagine to yourself whirlwinds of rain
and hail beating in at the open casements, and wandering
through the rooms. Tempests have left their vague traces upon
the interior walls. The chambers, though walled and covered
in, are visited by the hurricanes. Has the house been the scene
of some great crime? You may almost fancy that this spectral
dwelling, given up to solitude and darkness, might be heard
calling aloud for succour. Does it remain silent? Do voices
indeed issue from it? What business has it on hand in this
lonely place? The mystery of the dark hours rests securely
here. Its aspect is disquieting at noonday; what must it be
at midnight? The dreamer asks himself—for dreams have their
coherence—what this house may be between the dusk of evening
and the twilight of approaching dawn? Has the vast supernatural
world some relation with this deserted height, which
sometimes compels it to arrest its movements here, and to
descend and to become visible? Do the scattered elements of
the spirit world whirl around it? Does the impalpable take
form and substance here? Insoluble riddles! A holy awe is
in the very stones; that dim twilight has surely relations with
the infinite Unknown. When the sun has gone down, the song
of the birds will be hushed, the goatherd behind the hills will go
homeward with his goats; reptiles, taking courage from the
gathering darkness, will creep through the fissures of rocks; the
stars will begin to appear, night will come, but yonder two blank
casements will still be staring at the sky. They open to welcome
spirits and apparitions; for it is by the names of apparitions,
ghosts, phantom faces vaguely distinct, masks in the lurid light,
mysterious movements of minds, and shadows, that the popular
faith, at once ignorant and profound, translates the sombre
relations of this dwelling with the world of darkness.</p>

<p>The house is "haunted;" the popular phrase comprises
everything.</p>

<p>Credulous minds have their explanation; common-sense
thinkers have theirs also. "Nothing is more simple," say the
latter, "than the history of the house. It is an old observatory
of the time of the revolutionary wars and the days of smuggling.
It was built for such objects. The wars being ended, the house
was abandoned; but it was not pulled down, as it might one
day again become useful. The door and windows have been
walled to prevent people entering, or doing injury to the interior.
The walls of the windows, on the three sides which face the sea,
have been bricked up against the winds of the south and south-west.
That is all."</p>

<p>The ignorant and the credulous, however, are not satisfied.
In the first place, the house was not built at the period of the
wars of the Revolution. It bears the date "1780," which was
anterior to the Revolution. In the next place it was not built
for an observatory. It bears the letters "<span class="smcap">Elm-Pbilg</span>," which
are the double monogram of two families, and which indicate,
according to usage, that the house was built for the use of a
newly-married couple. Then it has certainly been inhabited:
why then should it be abandoned? If the door and windows
were bricked up to prevent people entering the house only, why
were two windows left open? Why are there no shutters, no
window-frames, no glass? Why were the walls bricked in on
one side if not on the other? The wind is prevented from entering
from the south; but why is it allowed to enter from the
north?</p>

<p>The credulous are wrong, no doubt; but it is clear that the
common-sense thinkers have not discovered the key to the
mystery. The problem remains still unsolved.</p>

<p>It is certain that the house is generally believed to have been
more useful than inconvenient to the smugglers.</p>

<p>The growth of superstitious terror tends to deprive facts of
their true proportions. Without doubt, many of the nocturnal
phenomena which have, by little and little, secured to the
building the reputation of being haunted, might be explained by
obscure and furtive visits, by brief sojourns of sailors near the
spot, and sometimes by the precaution, sometimes by the daring,
of men engaged in certain suspicious occupations concealing
themselves for their dark purposes, or allowing themselves to
be seen in order to inspire dread.</p>

<p>At this period, already a remote one, many daring deeds were
possible. The police—particularly in small places—was by no
means as efficient as in these days.</p>

<p>Add to this, that if the house was really, as was said, a resort
of the smugglers, their meetings there must, up to a certain
point, have been safe from interruptions precisely because the
house was dreaded by the superstitious people of the country.
Its ghostly reputation prevented its being visited for other
reasons. People do not generally apply to the police, or officers
of customs, on the subject of spectres. The superstitious rely
on making the sign of the cross; not on magistrates and indictments.
There is always a tacit connivance, involuntary it may
be, but not the less real, between the objects which inspire fear
and their victims. The terror-stricken feel a sort of culpability
in having encountered their terrors; they imagine themselves
to have unveiled a secret; and they have an inward fear,
unknown even to themselves, of aggravating their guilt, and
exciting the anger of the apparitions. All this makes them
discreet. And over and above this reason, the very instinct of
the credulous is silence; dread is akin to dumbness; the terrified
speak little; horror seems always to whisper, "Hush!"</p>

<p>It must be remembered that this was a period when the
Guernsey peasants believed that the Mystery of the Holy
Manger is repeated by oxen and asses every year on a fixed day;
a period when no one would have dared to enter a stable at
night for fear of coming upon the animals on their knees.</p>

<p>If the local legends and stories of the people can be credited,
the popular superstition went so far as to fasten to the walls
of the house at Pleinmont things of which the traces are still
visible—rats without feet, bats without wings, and bodies of
other dead animals. Here, too, were seen toads crushed
between the pages of a Bible, bunches of yellow lupins, and
other strange offerings, placed there by imprudent passers-by
at night, who, having fancied that they had seen something,
hoped by these small sacrifices to obtain pardon, and to appease
the ill-humours of were-wolves and evil spirits. In all times,
believers of this kind have flourished; some even in very high
places. Cæsar consulted Saganius, and Napoleon Mademoiselle
Lenormand. There are a kind of consciences so tender, that
they must seek indulgences even from Beelzebub. "May God
do, and Satan not undo," was one of the prayers of Charles the
Fifth. They come to persuade themselves that they may
commit sins even against the Evil One; and one of their
cherished objects was, to be irreproachable even in the eyes of
Satan. We find here an explanation of those adorations sometimes
paid to infernal spirits. It is only one more species of
fanaticism. Sins against the devil certainly exist in certain
morbid imaginations. The fancy that they have violated the
laws of the lower regions torments certain eccentric casuists;
they are haunted with scruples even about offending the demons.
A belief in the efficacy of devotions to the spirits of the Brocken
or Armuyr, a notion of having committed sins against hell,
visionary penances for imaginary crimes, avowals of the truth to
the spirit of falsehood, self-accusation before the origin of all
evil, and confessions in an inverted sense—are all realities, or
things at least which have existed. The annals of criminal
procedure against witchcraft and magic prove this in every page.
Human folly unhappily extends even thus far: when terror
seizes upon a man he does not stop easily. He dreams of
imaginary faults, imaginary purifications, and clears out his
conscience with the old witches' broom.</p>

<p>Be this as it may, if the house at Pleinmont had its secrets, it
kept them to itself; except by some rare chance, no one went
there to see. It was left entirely alone. Few people, indeed,
like to run the risk of an encounter with the other world.</p>

<p>Owing to the terror which it inspired, and which kept at a
distance all who could observe or bear testimony on the subject,
it had always been easy to obtain an entrance there at night by
means of a rope ladder, or even by the use of the first ladder
coming to hand in one of the neighbouring fields. A consignment
of goods or provisions left there might await in perfect
safety the time and opportunity for a furtive embarkation.
Tradition relates that forty years ago a fugitive—for political
offences as some affirm, for commercial as others say—remained
for some time concealed in the haunted house at Pleinmont;
whence he finally succeeded in embarking in a fishing-boat for
England. From England a passage is easily obtained to
America.</p>

<p>Tradition also avers that provisions deposited in this house
remain there untouched, Lucifer and the smugglers having an
interest in inducing whoever places them there to return.</p>

<p>From the summit of the house, there is a view to the south
of the Hanway Rocks, at about a mile from the shore.</p>

<p>These rocks are famous. They have been guilty of all the
evil deeds of which rocks are capable. They are the most ruthless
destroyers of the sea. They lie in a treacherous ambush
for vessels in the night. They have contributed to the enlargement
of the cemeteries at Torteval and Rocquaine.</p>

<p>A lighthouse was erected upon these rocks in 1862. At the
present day, the Hanways light the way for the vessels which they
once lured to destruction; the destroyer in ambush now bears a
lighted torch in his hand; and mariners seek in the horizon, as
a protector and a guide, the rock which they used to fly as a
pitiless enemy. It gives confidence by night in that vast space
where it was so long a terror—like a robber converted into a
gendarme.</p>

<p>There are three Hanways: the Great Hanway, the Little
Hanway, and the Mauve. It is upon the Little Hanway that
the red light is placed at the present time.</p>

<p>This reef of rocks forms part of a group of peaks, some beneath
the sea, some rising out of it. It towers above them all; like a
fortress, it has advanced works: on the side of the open sea, a
chain of thirteen rocks; on the north, two breakers—the High
Fourquiés, the Needles, and a sandbank called the Hérouée. On
the south, three rocks—the Cat Rock, the Percée, and the Herpin
Rock; then two banks—the South Bank and the Muet: besides
which, there is, on the side opposite Pleinmont, the Tas de
Pois d'Aval.</p>

<p>To swim across the channel from the Hanways to Pleinmont
is difficult, but not impossible. We have already said that this
was one of the achievements of Clubin. The expert swimmer
who knows this channel can find two resting-places, the Round
Rock, and further on, a little out of the course, to the left, the
Red Rock.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>V</h4>

<h5>THE BIRDS'-NESTERS</h5>


<p>It was near the period of that Saturday which was passed by
Sieur Clubin at Torteval that a curious incident occurred, which
was little heard of at the time, and which did not generally transpire
till a long time afterwards. For many things, as we have
already observed, remain undivulged, simply by reason of the
terror which they have caused in those who have witnessed
them.</p>

<p>In the night-time between Saturday and Sunday—we are
exact in the matter of the date, and we believe it to be correct—three
boys climbed up the hill at Pleinmont. The boys
returned to the village: they came from the seashore. They
were what are called, in the corrupt French of that part, "déniquoiseaux,"
or birds'-nesters. Wherever there are cliffs and
cleft-rocks overhanging the sea, the young birds'-nesters abound.
The reader will remember that Gilliatt interfered in this matter
for the sake of the birds as well as for the sake of the children.</p>

<p>The "déniquoiseaux" are a sort of sea-urchins, and are not a
very timid species.</p>

<p>The night was very dark. Dense masses of cloud obscured
the zenith. Three o'clock had sounded in the steeple of Torteval
which is round and pointed like a magician's hat.</p>

<p>Why did the boys return so late? Nothing more simple.
They had been searching for sea-gulls' nests in the Tas de Pois
d'Aval. The season having been very mild, the pairing of the
birds had begun very early. The children watching the fluttering
of the male and female about their nests, and excited by
the pursuit, had forgotten the time. The waters had crept up
around them; they had no time to regain the little bay in which
they had moored their boat, and they were compelled to wait
upon one of the peaks of the Tas de Pois for the ebb of the tide.
Hence their late return. Mothers wait on such occasions in
feverish anxiety for the return of their children, and when they
find them safe, give vent to their joy in the shape of anger, and
relieve their tears by dealing them a sound drubbing. The boys
accordingly hastened their steps, but in fear and trembling.
Their haste was of that sort which is glad of an excuse for
stopping, and which is not inconsistent with a reluctance to
reach their destination; for they had before them the prospect
of warm embraces, to be followed with an inevitable thrashing.</p>

<p>One only of the boys had nothing of this to fear. He was an
orphan: a French boy, without father or mother, and perfectly
content just then with his motherless condition; for nobody
taking any interest in him, his back was safe from the dreaded
blows. The two others were natives of Guernsey, and belonged
to the parish of Torteval.</p>

<p>Having climbed the grassy hill, the three birds'-nesters
reached the tableland on which was situate the haunted
house.</p>

<p>They began by being in fear, which is the proper frame of
mind of every passer-by; and particularly of every child at
that hour and in that place.</p>

<p>They had a strong desire to take to their heels as fast as
possible, and a strong desire, also, to stay and look.</p>

<p>They did stop.</p>

<p>They looked towards the solitary building.</p>

<p>It was all dark and terrible.</p>

<p>It stood in the midst of the solitary plain—an obscure block,
a hideous but symmetrical excrescence; a high square mass
with right-angled corners, like an immense altar in the darkness.</p>

<p>The first thought of the boys was to run: the second was to
draw nearer. They had never seen this house before. There is
such a thing as a desire to be frightened arising from curiosity.
They had a little French boy with them, which emboldened
them to approach.</p>

<p>It is well known that the French have no fear.</p>

<p>Besides, it is reassuring to have company in danger; to be
frightened in the company of two others is encouraging.</p>

<p>And then they were a sort of hunters accustomed to peril.
They were children; they were used to search, to rummage, to
spy out hidden things. They were in the habit of peeping into
holes; why not into this hole? Hunting is exciting. Looking
into birds' nests perhaps gives an itch for looking a little into a
nest of ghosts. A rummage in the dark regions. Why not?</p>

<p>From prey to prey, says the proverb, we come to the devil.
After the birds, the demons. The boys were on the way to
learn the secret of those terrors of which their parents had told
them. To be on the track of hobgoblin tales—nothing could
be more attractive. To have long stories to tell like the good
housewives. The notion was tempting.</p>

<p>All this mixture of ideas, in their state of half-confusion,
half-instinct, in the minds of the Guernsey birds'-nesters, finally
screwed their courage to the point. They approached the
house.</p>

<p>The little fellow who served them as a sort of moral support
in the adventure was certainly worthy of their confidence. He
was a bold boy—an apprentice to a ship-caulker; one of those
children who have already become men. He slept on a little
straw in a shed in the ship-caulker's yard, getting his own
living, having red hair, and a loud voice; climbing easily up
walls and trees, not encumbered with prejudices in the matter
of property in the apples within his reach; a lad who had
worked in the repairing dock for vessels of war—a child of
chance, a happy orphan, born in France, no one knew exactly
where; ready to give a centime to a beggar; a mischievous
fellow, but a good one at heart; one who had talked to Parisians.
At this time he was earning a shilling a day by caulking the
fishermen's boats under repair at the Pêqueries. When he felt
inclined he gave himself a holiday, and went birds'-nesting.
Such was the little French boy.</p>

<p>The solitude of the place impressed them with a strange feeling
of dread. They felt the threatening aspect of the silent
house. It was wild and savage. The naked and deserted
plateau terminated in a precipice at a short distance from its
steep incline. The sea below was quiet. There was no wind.
Not a blade of grass stirred.</p>

<p>The birds'-nesters advanced by slow steps, the French boy
at their head, and looking towards the house.</p>

<p>One of them, afterwards relating the story, or as much of it
as had remained in his head, added, "It did not speak."</p>

<p>They came nearer, holding their breath, as one might approach
a savage animal.</p>

<p>They had climbed the hill at the side of the house which
descended to seaward towards a little isthmus of rocks almost
inaccessible. Thus they had come pretty near to the building;
but they saw only the southern side, which was all walled up.
They did not dare to approach by the other side, where the
terrible windows were.</p>

<p>They grew bolder, however; the caulker's apprentice
whispered, "Let's veer to larboard. That's the handsome
side. Let's have a look at the black windows."</p>

<p>The little band accordingly "veered to larboard," and came
round to the other side of the house.</p>

<p>The two windows were lighted up.</p>

<p>The boys took to their heels.</p>

<p>When they had got to some distance, the French boy, however,
returned.</p>

<p>"Hillo!" said he, "the lights have vanished."</p>

<p>The light at the windows had, indeed, disappeared. The
outline of the building was seen as sharply defined as if stamped
out with a punch against the livid sky.</p>

<p>Their fear was not abated, but their curiosity had increased.
The birds'-nesters approached.</p>

<p>Suddenly the light reappeared at both windows at the same
moment.</p>

<p>The two young urchins from Torteval took to their heels and
vanished. The daring French boy did not advance, but he
kept his ground.</p>

<p>He remained motionless, confronting the house and watching
it.</p>

<p>The light disappeared, and appeared again once more.
Nothing could be more horrible. The reflection made a vague
streak of light upon the grass, wet with the night dew. All of
a moment the light cast upon the walls of the house two huge
dark profiles, and the shadows of enormous heads.</p>

<p>The house, however, being without ceilings, and having
nothing left but its four walls and roof, one window could not
be lighted without the other.</p>

<p>Perceiving that the caulker's apprentice kept his ground,
the other birds'-nesters returned, step by step, and one after
the other, trembling and curious. The caulker's apprentice
whispered to them, "There are ghosts in the house. I have
seen the nose of one." The two Torteval boys got behind their
companion, standing tiptoe against his shoulder; and thus
sheltered, and taking him for their shield, felt bolder and
watched also.</p>

<p>The house on its part seemed also to be watching them.
There it stood in the midst of that vast darkness and silence,
with its two glaring eyes. These were its upper windows.
The light vanished, reappeared, and vanished again, in the
fashion of these unearthly illuminations. These sinister intermissions
had, probably, some connection with the opening and
shutting of the infernal regions. The air-hole of a sepulchre
has thus been seen to produce effects like those from a dark
lantern.</p>

<p>Suddenly a dark form, like that of a human being, ascended to
one of the windows, as if from without, and plunged into the
interior of the house.</p>

<p>To enter by the window is the custom with spirits.</p>

<p>The light was for a moment more brilliant, then went out,
and appeared no more. The house became dark. The noises
resembled voices. This is always the case. When there was
anything to be seen it is silent. When all became invisible
again, noises were heard.</p>

<p>There is a silence peculiar to night-time at sea. The repose
of darkness is deeper on the water than on the land. When
there is neither wind nor wave in that wild expanse, over which,
in ordinary time, even the flight of eagles makes no sound, the
movement of a fly could be heard. This sepulchral quiet gave
a dismal relief to the noises which issued from the house.</p>

<p>"Let us look," said the French boy.</p>

<p>And he made a step towards the house.</p>

<p>The others were so frightened that they resolved to follow
him. They did not dare even to run away alone.</p>

<p>Just as they had passed a heap of fagots, which for some
mysterious reason seemed to inspire them with a little courage
in that solitude, a white owl flew towards them from a bush.
The owls have a suspicious sort of flight, a sidelong skim which
is suggestive of mischief afloat. The bird passed near the boys,
fixing upon them its round eyes, bright amidst the darkness.</p>

<p>A shudder ran through the group behind the French boy.</p>

<p>He looked up at the owl and said:</p>

<p>"Too late, my bird; I <i>will</i> look."</p>

<p>And he advanced.</p>

<p>The crackling sound made by his thick-nailed boots among
the furze bushes did not prevent his hearing the noise in the
house, which rose and fell with the continuousness and the
calm accent of a dialogue.</p>

<p>A moment afterwards the boy added:</p>

<p>"Besides, it is only fools who believe in spirits."</p>

<p>Insolence in the face of danger rallies the cowardly, and
inspirits them to go on.</p>

<p>The two Torteval lads resumed their march, quickening their
steps behind the caulker's apprentice.</p>

<p>The haunted house seemed to them to grow larger before their
eyes. This optical illusion of fear is founded in reality. The
house did indeed grow larger, for they were coming nearer to it.</p>

<p>Meanwhile the voices in the house took a tone more and
more distinct. The children listened. The ear, too, has its
power of exaggerating. It was different to a murmur, more
than a whispering, less than an uproar. Now and then one or
two words, clearly articulated, could be caught. These words,
impossible to be understood, sounded strangely. The boys
stopped and listened; then went forward again.</p>

<p>"It's the ghosts talking," said the caulker's apprentice; "but
I don't believe in ghosts."</p>

<p>The Torteval boys were sorely tempted to shrink behind the
heap of fagots, but they had already left it far behind; and
their friend the caulker continued to advance towards the house.
They trembled at remaining with him; but they dared not
leave him.</p>

<p>Step by step, and perplexed, they followed. The caulker's
apprentice turned towards them and said—</p>

<p>"You know it isn't true. There are no such things."</p>

<p>The house grew taller and taller. The voices became more
and more distinct.</p>

<p>They drew nearer.</p>

<p>And now they could perceive within the house something
like a muffled light. It was a faint glimmer, like one of those
effects produced by dark lanterns, already referred to, and
which are common at the midnight meetings of witches.</p>

<p>When they were close to the house they halted.</p>

<p>One of the two Torteval boys ventured on an observation:</p>

<p>"It isn't spirits: it is ladies dressed in white."</p>

<p>"What's that hanging from the window?" asked the other.</p>

<p>"It looks like a rope."</p>

<p>"It's a snake."</p>

<p>"It is only a hangman's rope," said the French boy, authoritatively.
"That's what they use. Only I don't believe in
them."</p>

<p>And in three bounds, rather than steps, he found himself
against the wall of the building.</p>

<p>The two others, trembling, imitated him, and came pressing
against him, one on his right side, the other on his left. The
boys applied their ears to the wall. The sounds continued.</p>

<p>The following was the conversation of the phantoms:—</p>

<hr style="width: 45%;" />

<p>"Asi, entendido esta?"</p>

<p>"Entendido."</p>

<p>"Dicho?"</p>

<p>"Dicho."</p>

<p>"Aqui esperara un hombre, y podra marcharse en Inglaterra
con Blasquito."</p>

<p>"Pagando?"</p>

<hr style="width: 45%;" />

<p>"So that is understood?"</p>

<p>"Perfectly."</p>

<p>"As is arranged?"</p>

<p>"As is arranged."</p>

<p>"A man will wait here, and can accompany Blasquito to
England."</p>

<p>"Paying the expense?"</p>

<hr style="width: 45%;" />

<p>"Pagando."</p>

<p>"Blasquito tomara al hombre en su barca."</p>

<p>"Sin buscar para conocer a su pais?"</p>

<p>"No nos toca."</p>

<p>"Ni a su nombre del hombre?"</p>

<p>"No se pide el nombre, pero se pesa la bolsa."</p>

<p>"Bien: esperara el hombre en esa casa."</p>

<p>"Tenga que comer."</p>

<p>"Tendra."</p>

<p>"Onde?"</p>

<p>"En este saco que he llevado."</p>

<p>"Muy bien."</p>

<p>"Puedo dexar el saco aqui?"</p>

<p>"Los contrabandistas no son ladrones."</p>

<p>"Y vosotros, cuando marchais?"</p>

<p>"Mañana por la mañana. Si su hombre de usted parado
podria venir con nosotros."</p>

<p>"Parado no esta."</p>

<p>"Hacienda suya."</p>

<p>"Cuantos dias esperara alli?"</p>

<hr style="width: 45%;" />

<p>"Paying the expense."</p>

<p>"Blasquito will take the man in his bark."</p>

<p>"Without seeking to know what country he belongs
to?"</p>

<p>"That is no business of ours."</p>

<p>"Without asking his name?"</p>

<p>"We do not ask for names; we only feel the weight of the
purse."</p>

<p>"Good: the man shall wait in this house."</p>

<p>"He must have provisions."</p>

<p>"He will be furnished with them."</p>

<p>"How?"</p>

<p>"From this bag which I have brought."</p>

<p>"Very good."</p>

<p>"Can I leave this bag here?"</p>

<p>"Smugglers are not robbers."</p>

<p>"And when do you go?"</p>

<p>"To-morrow morning. If your man was ready he could
come with us."</p>

<p>"He is not prepared."</p>

<p>"That is his affair."</p>

<p>"How many days will he have to wait in this house?"</p>

<hr style="width: 45%;" />

<p>"Dos, tres, quatro dias; menos o mas."</p>

<p>"Es cierto que el Blasquito vendra?"</p>

<p>"Cierto."</p>

<p>"En est Plainmont?"</p>

<p>"En est Plainmont."</p>

<p>"A qual semana?"</p>

<p>"La que viene."</p>

<p>"A qual dia?"</p>

<p>"Viernes, o sabado, o domingo."</p>

<p>"No peuede faltar?"</p>

<p>"Es mi tocayo."</p>

<p>"Por qualquiera tiempo viene?"</p>

<p>"Qualquiera. No tieme. Soy el Blasco, es el Blasquito."</p>

<p>"Asi, no puede faltar de venir en Guernesey?"</p>

<p>"Vengo a un mes, y viene al otro mes."</p>

<p>"Entiendo."</p>

<p>"A cuentar del otro sabado, desde hoy en ocho, no se parasan
cinco dias sin que venga el Blasquito."</p>

<p>"Pero un muy malo mar?"</p>

<p>"Egurraldia gaiztoa."</p>

<hr style="width: 45%;" />

<p>"Two, three, or four days; more or less."</p>

<p>"Is it certain that Blasquito will come?"</p>

<p>"Certain."</p>

<p>"Here to Pleinmont?"</p>

<p>"To Pleinmont."</p>

<p>"When?"</p>

<p>"Next week."</p>

<p>"What day?"</p>

<p>"Friday, Saturday, or Sunday."</p>

<p>"May he not fail?"</p>

<p>"He is my Tocayo."</p>

<p>"Will he come in any weather?"</p>

<p>"At any time. He has no fear. My name is Blasco, his
Blasquito."</p>

<p>"So he cannot fail to come to Guernsey?"</p>

<p>"I come one month—he the other."</p>

<p>"I understand."</p>

<p>"Counting from Saturday last, one week from to-day, five
days cannot elapse without bringing Blasquito."</p>

<p>"But if there is much sea?"</p>

<p>"Bad weather?"</p>

<p></p><hr style="width: 45%;" />

<p>"Si."</p>

<p>"No vendria el Blasquito tan pronto, pero vendria."</p>

<p>"Donde vendra?"</p>

<p>"De Vilvao."</p>

<p>"Onde ira?"</p>

<p>"En Portland."</p>

<p>"Bien."</p>

<p>"O en Tor Bay."</p>

<p>"Mejor."</p>

<p>"Su humbre de usted puede estarse quieto."</p>

<p>"No traidor sera, el Blasquito?"</p>

<p>"Los cobardes son traidores. Somos valientes. El mar es
la iglesia del invierno. La traicion es la iglesia del infierno."</p>

<p>"No se entiende a lo que dicemos?"</p>

<p>"Escuchar a nosotros y mirar a nosotros es imposible. La
espanta hace alli el desierto."</p>

<p>"Lo sè."</p>

<p>"Quien se atravesaria a escuchar?"</p>

<p>"Es verdad."</p>

<p>"Y escucharian que no entiendrian. Hablamos a una</p>

<hr style="width: 45%;" />

<p>"Yes."</p>

<p>"Blasquito will not come so quickly, but he will come."</p>

<p>"Whence will he come?"</p>

<p>"From Bilbao."</p>

<p>"Where will he be going?"</p>

<p>"To Portland."</p>

<p>"Good."</p>

<p>"Or to Torbay."</p>

<p>"Better still."</p>

<p>"Your man may rest easy."</p>

<p>"Blasquito will betray nothing?"</p>

<p>"Cowards are the only traitors. We are men of courage.
The sea is the church of winter. Treason is the church of
hell."</p>

<p>"No one hears what we say?"</p>

<p>"It is impossible to be seen or overheard. The people's
fear of this spot makes it deserted."</p>

<p>"I know it."</p>

<p>"Who is there who would dare to listen here?"</p>

<p>"True."</p>

<p>"Besides, if they listened, none would understand. We</p>

<hr style="width: 45%;" />

<p>lengua fiera y nuestra que no se conoce. Despues que la sabeis,
eries con nosotros."</p>

<p>"Soy viendo para componer las haciendas con ustedes."</p>

<p>"Bueno."</p>

<p>"Y allora me voy."</p>

<p>"Mucho."</p>

<p>"Digame usted, hombre. Si el pasagero quiere que el
Blasquito le lleven en unguna otra parte que Portland o Tor
Bay?"</p>

<p>"Tenga onces."</p>

<p>"El Blasquito hara lo que querra el hombre?"</p>

<p>"El Blasquito hace lo que quieren las onces."</p>

<p>"Es menester mucho tiempo para ir en Tor Bay?"</p>

<p>"Como quiere el viento."</p>

<p>"Ocho horas?"</p>

<p>"Menos, o mas."</p>

<p>"El Blasquito obedecera al pasagero?"</p>

<p>"Si le obedece el mar al Blasquito."</p>

<p>"Bien pagado sera."</p>

<p>"El oro es el oro. El viento es el viento."</p>

<p>"Mucho."</p>

<hr style="width: 45%;" />

<p>speak a wild language of our own, which nobody knows hereabouts.
As you know it, you are one of us."</p>

<p>"I came only to make these arrangements with you."</p>

<p>"Very good."</p>

<p>"I must now take my leave."</p>

<p>"Be it so."</p>

<p>"Tell me; suppose the passenger should wish Blasquito to
take him anywhere else than to Portland or Torbay?"</p>

<p>"Let him bring some gold coins."</p>

<p>"Will Blasquito consult the stranger's convenience?"</p>

<p>"Blasquito will do whatever the gold coins command."</p>

<p>"Does it take long to go to Torbay?"</p>

<p>"That is as it pleases the winds."</p>

<p>"Eight hours?"</p>

<p>"More or less."</p>

<p>"Will Blasquito obey the passenger?"</p>

<p>"If the sea will obey Blasquito."</p>

<p>"He will be well rewarded."</p>

<p>"Gold is gold; and the sea is the sea."</p>

<p>"That is true."</p>

<hr style="width: 45%;" />

<p>"El hombre hace lo que puede con el oro. Dios con el viento
hace lo que quiere."</p>

<p>"Aqui sera viernes el que desea marcharse con Blasquito."</p>

<p>"Pues."</p>

<p>"A qual momento llega Blasquito."</p>

<p>"A la noche. A la noche se llega, a la noche se marcha.
Tenemos una muger quien se llama el mar, y una quien se
llama la noche."</p>

<p>"La muger puede faltar, la hermana no."</p>

<p>"Todo dicho esta. Abour, hombres."</p>

<p>"Buenas tardes. Un golpe de aquardiente?"</p>

<p>"Gracias."</p>

<p>"Es mejor que xarope."</p>

<p>"Tengo vuestra palabra."</p>

<p>"Mi nombre es Pundonor."</p>

<p>"Sea usted con Dios."</p>

<p>"Ereis gentleman, y soy caballero."</p>

<hr style="width: 45%;" />

<p>"Man with his gold does what he can. Heaven with its
winds does what it will."</p>

<p>"The man who is to accompany Blasquito will be here on
Friday."</p>

<p>"Good."</p>

<p>"At what hour will Blasquito appear?"</p>

<p>"In the night. We arrive by night; and sail by night.
We have a wife who is called the sea, and a sister called night.
The wife betrays sometimes; but the sister never."</p>

<p>"All is settled, then. Good-night, my men."</p>

<p>"Good-night. A drop of brandy first?"</p>

<p>"Thank you."</p>

<p>"That is better than a syrup."</p>

<p>"I have your word."</p>

<p>"My name is Point-of-Honour."</p>

<p>"Adieu."</p>

<p>"You are a gentleman: I am a caballero."</p>

<hr style="width: 45%;" />

<p>It was clear that only devils could talk in this way. The
children did not listen long. This time they took to flight in
earnest; the French boy, convinced at last, running even
quicker than the others.</p>

<p>On the Tuesday following this Saturday, Sieur Clubin returned
to St. Malo, bringing back the Durande.</p>

<p>The <i>Tamaulipas</i> was still at anchor in the roads.</p>

<p>Sieur Clubin, between the whiffs of his pipe, said to the landlord
of the Jean Auberge:</p>

<p>"Well; and when does the <i>Tamaulipas</i> get under way?"</p>

<p>"The day after to-morrow—Thursday," replied the landlord.</p>

<p>On that evening, Clubin supped at the coast-guard officers'
table; and, contrary to his habit, went out after his supper.
The consequence of his absence was, that he could not attend to
the office of the Durande, and thus lost a little in the matter of
freights. This fact was remarked in a man ordinarily punctual.</p>

<p>It appeared that he had chatted a few moments with his
friend the money-changer.</p>

<p>He returned two hours after Noguette had sounded the
Curfew bell. The Brazilian bell sounds at ten o'clock. It was
therefore midnight.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VI</h4>

<h5>THE JACRESSADE</h5>


<p>Forty years ago, St. Malo possessed an alley known by the
name of the "Ruelle Coutanchez." This alley no longer exists,
having been removed for the improvements of the town.</p>

<p>It was a double row of houses, leaning one towards the other,
and leaving between them just room enough for a narrow
rivulet, which was called the street. By stretching the legs,
it was possible to walk on both sides of the stream, touching
with head or elbows, as you went, the houses either on the right
or the left. These old relics of mediæval Normandy have
almost a human interest. Tumbledown houses and sorcerers
always go together. Their leaning stories, their overhanging
walls, their bowed penthouses, and their old thick-set irons,
seem like lips, chin, nose, and eyebrows. The garret window
is the blind eye. The walls are the wrinkled and blotchy cheeks.
The opposite houses lay their foreheads together as if they were
plotting some malicious deed. All those words of ancient
villany—like cut-throat, "slit-weazand," and the like—are
closely connected with architecture of this kind.</p>

<p>One of these houses in the alley—the largest and the most
famous, or notorious—was known by the name of the Jacressade.</p>

<p>The Jacressade was a lodging-house for people who do not
lodge. In all towns, and particularly in sea-ports, there is
always found beneath the lowest stratum of society a sort of
residuum: vagabonds who are more than a match for justice;
rovers after adventures; chemists of the swindling order, who
are always dropping their lives into the melting-pot; people
in rags of every shape, and in every style of wearing them;
withered fruits of roguery; bankrupt existences; consciences
that have filed their schedule; men who have failed in the house-breaking
trade (for the great masters of burglary move in a
higher sphere); workmen and workwomen in the trade of
wickedness; oddities, male and female; men in coats out at
elbows; scoundrels reduced to indigence; rogues who have
missed the wages of roguery; men who have been hit in the
social duel; harpies who have no longer any prey; petty
larceners; <i>queux</i> in the double and unhappy meaning of that
word. Such are the constituents of that living mass. Human
nature is here reduced to something bestial. It is the refuse of
the social state, heaped up in an obscure corner, where from
time to time descends that dreaded broom which is known by the
name of police. In St. Malo, the Jacressade was the name of
this corner.</p>

<p>It is not in dens of this sort that we find the high-class criminals—the
robbers, forgers, and other great products of ignorance
and poverty. If murder is represented here, it is generally in
the person of some coarse drunkard; in the matter of robbery,
the company rarely rise higher than the mere sharper. The
vagrant is there; but not the highwayman. It would not,
however, be safe to trust this distinction. This last stage of
vagabondage may have its extremes of scoundrelism. It was
on an occasion, when casting their nets into the Epi-scié—which
was in Paris what the Jacressade was in St. Malo—that the
police captured the notorious Lacenaire.</p>

<p>These lurking-places refuse nobody. To fall in the social
scale has a tendency to bring men to one level. Sometimes
honesty in tatters found itself there. Virtue and probity have
been known before now to be brought to strange passes. We
must not judge always by appearances, even in the palace or at
the galleys. Public respect, as well as universal reprobation,
requires testing. Surprising results sometimes spring from this
principle. An angel may be discovered in the stews; a pearl in
the dunghill. Such sad and dazzling discoveries are not altogether
unknown.</p>

<p>The Jacressade was rather a courtyard than a house; and
more of a well than a courtyard. It had no stories looking on
the street. Its façade was simply a high wall, with a low gateway.
You raised the latch, pushed the gate, and were at once
in the courtyard.</p>

<p>In the midst of this yard might be perceived a round hole,
encircled with a margin of stones, and even with the ground.
The yard was small, the well large. A broken pavement surrounded
it.</p>

<p>The courtyard was square, and built on three sides only. On
the side of the street was only the wall; facing you as you
entered the gateway stood the house, the two wings of which
formed the sides to right and left.</p>

<p>Any one entering there after nightfall, at his own risk and
peril, would have heard a confused murmur of voices; and, if
there had been moonlight or starlight enough to give shape to
the obscure forms before his eyes, this is what he would have
seen.</p>

<p>The courtyard: the well. Around the courtyard, in front of
the gate, a lean-to or shed, in a sort of horse-shoe form, but with
square corners; a rotten gallery, with a roof of joists supported
by stone pillars at unequal distances. In the centre, the well;
around the well, upon a litter of straw, a kind of circular chaplet,
formed of the soles of boots and shoes; some trodden down at
heel, some showing the toes of the wearers, some the naked heels.
The feet of men, women, and children, all asleep.</p>

<p>Beyond these feet, the eye might have distinguished, in the
shadow of the shed, bodies, drooping heads, forms stretched out
lazily, bundles of rags of both sexes, a promiscuous assemblage,
a strange and revolting mass of life. The accommodation of this
sleeping chamber was open to all, at the rate of two sous a week.
On a stormy night the rain fell upon the feet, the whirling snow
settled on the bodies of those wretched sleepers.</p>

<p>Who were these people? The unknown. They came there
at night, and departed in the morning. Creatures of this kind
form part of the social fabric. Some stole in during the darkness,
and paid nothing. The greater part had scarcely eaten
during the day. All kinds of vice and baseness, every sort of
moral infection, every species of distress were there. The same
sleep settled down upon all in this bed of filth. The dreams of
all these companions in misery went on side by side. A dismal
meeting-place, where misery and weakness, half-sobered
debauchery, weariness from long walking to and fro, with evil
thoughts, in quest of bread, pallor with closed eyelids, remorse,
envy, lay mingled and festering in the same miasma, with faces
that had the look of death, and dishevelled hair mixed with the
filth and sweepings of the streets. Such was the putrid heap of
life fermenting in this dismal spot. An unlucky turn of the wheel
of fortune, a ship arrived on the day before, a discharge from
prison, a dark night, or some other chance, had cast them here,
to find a miserable shelter. Every day brought some new
accumulation of such misery. Let him enter who would, sleep
who could, speak who dared; for it was a place of whispers. The
new comers hastened to bury themselves in the mass, or tried
to seek oblivion in sleep, since there was none in the darkness of
the place. They snatched what little of themselves they could
from the jaws of death. They closed their eyes in that confusion
of horrors which every day renewed. They were the
embodiment of misery, thrown off from society, as the scum is
from the sea.</p>

<p>It was not every one who could even get a share of the straw.
More than one figure was stretched out naked upon the flags.
They lay down worn out with weariness, and awoke paralysed.
The well, without lid or parapet, and thirty feet in depth, gaped
open night and day. Rain fell around it; filth accumulated
about, and the gutters of the yard ran down and filtered through
its sides. The pail for drawing the water stood by the side.
Those who were thirsty drank there; some, disgusted with life,
drowned themselves in it—slipped from their slumber in the
filthy shed into that profounder sleep. In the year 1819, the body
of a boy, of fourteen years old, was taken up out of this well.</p>

<p>To be safe in this house, it was necessary to be of the "right
sort." The uninitiated were regarded with suspicion.</p>

<p>Did these miserable wretches, then, know each other? No;
yet they scented out the genuine guest of the Jacressade.</p>

<p>The mistress of the house was a young and rather pretty
woman, wearing a cap trimmed with ribbons. She washed
herself now and then with water from the well. She had a
wooden leg.</p>

<p>At break of day, the courtyard became empty. Its inmates
dispersed.</p>

<p>An old cock and some other fowls were kept in the courtyard,
where they raked among the filth of the place all day long. A
long horizontal beam, supported by posts, traversed the yard—a
gibbet-shaped erection, not out of keeping with the associations
of the place. Sometimes on the morrow of a rainy-day,
a silk dress, mudded and wet, would be seen hanging out to dry
upon this beam. It belonged to the woman with the wooden
leg.</p>

<p>Over the shed, and like it, surrounding the yard, was a story,
and above this story a loft. A rotten wooden ladder, passing
through a hole in the roof of the shed, conducted to this story;
and up this ladder the woman would climb, sometimes staggering
while its crazy rounds creaked beneath her.</p>

<p>The occasional lodgers, whether by the week or the night,
slept in the courtyard; the regular inmates lived in the house.</p>

<p>Windows without a pane of glass, door-frames with no door,
fireplaces without stoves; such were the chief features of the
interior. You might pass from one room to the other, indifferently,
by a long square aperture which had been the door, or
by a triangular hole between the joists of the partitions. The
fallen plaster of the ceiling lay about the floor. It was difficult
to say how the old house still stood erect. The high winds
indeed shook it. The lodgers ascended as they could by the
worn and slippery steps of the ladder. Everything was open to
the air. The wintry atmosphere was absorbed into the house,
like water into a sponge. The multitude of spiders seemed
alone to guarantee the place against falling to pieces immediately.
There was no sign of furniture. Two or three
paillasses were in the corner, their ticking torn in parts, and
showing more dust than straw within. Here and there were a
water-pot and an earthen pipkin. A close, disagreeable odour
haunted the rooms.</p>

<p>The windows looked out upon the square yard. The scene
was like the interior of a scavenger's cart. The things, not to
speak of the human beings, which lay rusting, mouldering, and
putrefying there, were indescribable. The fragments seemed
to fraternise together. Some fell from the walls, others from the
living tenants of the place. The débris were sown with their
tatters.</p>

<p>Besides the floating population which bivouacked nightly in
the square yard, the Jacressade had three permanent lodgers—a
charcoal man, a rag-picker, and a "gold-maker." The charcoal
man and the rag-picker occupied two of the paillasses of
the first story; the "gold-maker," a chemist, lodged in the loft,
which was called, no one knew why, the garret. Nobody knew
where the woman slept. The "gold-maker" was a poet in a
small way. He inhabited a room in the roof, under the tiles—a
chamber with a narrow window, and a large stone fireplace
forming a gulf, in which the wind howled at will. The garret
window having no frame, he had nailed across it a piece of iron
sheathing, part of the wreck of a ship. This sheathing left
little room for the entrance of light and much for the entrance
of cold. The charcoal-man paid rent from time to time in the
shape of a sack of charcoal; the rag-picker paid with a bowl of
grain for the fowls every week; the "gold-maker" did not pay
at all. Meanwhile the latter consumed the very house itself for
fuel. He had pulled down the little woodwork which remained;
and every now and then he took from the wall or the roof a lath
or some scantling, to heat his crucible. Upon the partition,
above the rag-picker's mattress, might have been seen two
columns of figures, marked in chalk by the rag-picker himself
from week to week—a column of threes, and a column of
fives—according
as the bowl of grain had cost him three liards or
five centimes. The gold-pot of the "chemist" was an old
fragment of a bomb-shell, promoted by him to the dignity of a
crucible, in which he mixed his ingredients. The transmutation
of metals absorbed all his thoughts. He was determined before
he died to revenge himself by breaking the windows of orthodox
science with the real philosopher's stone. His furnace consumed
a good deal of wood. The hand-rail of the stairs had disappeared.
The house was slowly burning away. The landlady
said to him, "You will leave us nothing but the shell." He
mollified her by addressing her in verses.</p>

<p>Such was the Jacressade.</p>

<p>A boy of twelve, or, perhaps, sixteen—for he was like a
dwarf, with a large wen upon his neck, and always carrying a
broom in his hand—was the domestic of the place.</p>

<p>The habitués entered by the gateway of the courtyard; the
public entered by the shop.</p>

<p>In the high wall, facing the street, and to the right of the
entrance to the courtyard, was a square opening, serving at
once as a door and a window. This was the shop. The square
opening had a shutter and a frame—the only shutter in all the
house which had hinges and bolts. Behind this square aperture,
which was open to the street, was a little room, a compartment
obtained by curtailing the sleeping shed in the courtyard. Over
the door, passers-by read the inscription in charcoal, "Curiosities
sold here." On three boards, forming the shop front, were
several china pots without ears, a Chinese parasol made of goldbeater's
skin, and ornamented with figures, torn here and there,
and impossible to open or shut; fragments of iron, and shapeless
pieces of old pottery, and dilapidated hats and bonnets,
three or four shells, some packets of old bone and metal buttons,
a tobacco-box with a portrait of Marie-Antoinette, and a dog's-eared
volume of Boisbertrand's <i>Algebra</i>. Such was the stock
of the shop; this assortment completed the "curiosities." The
shop communicated by a back door with the yard in which was
the well. It was furnished with a table and a stool. The
woman with a wooden leg presided at the counter.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VII</h4>

<h5>NOCTURNAL BUYERS AND MYSTERIOUS SELLERS</h5>


<p>Clubin had been absent from the Jean Auberge all the evening
of Tuesday. On the Wednesday night he was absent again.</p>

<p>In the dusk of that evening, two strangers penetrated into
the mazes of the Ruelle Coutanchez. They stopped in front of
the Jacressade. One of them knocked at the window; the
door of the shop opened, and they entered. The woman with
the wooden leg met them with the smile which she reserved for
respectable citizens. There was a candle on the table.</p>

<p>The strangers were, in fact, respectable citizens. The one
who had knocked said, "Good-day, mistress. I have come
for that affair."</p>

<p>The woman with the wooden leg smiled again, and went out by
the back-door leading to the courtyard, and where the well was.
A moment afterwards the back-door was opened again, and a
man stood in the doorway. He wore a cap and a blouse. It
was easy to see the shape of something under his blouse. He
had bits of old straw in his clothes, and looked as if he had just
been aroused from sleep.</p>

<p>He advanced and exchanged glances with the strangers. The
man in the blouse looked puzzled, but cunning; he said—</p>

<p>"You are the gunsmith?"</p>

<p>The one who had tapped at the window replied—</p>

<p>"Yes; you are the man from Paris?"</p>

<p>"Known as Redskin. Yes."</p>

<p>"Show me the thing."</p>

<p>The man took from under his blouse a weapon extremely rare
at that period in Europe. It was a revolver.</p>

<p>The weapon was new and bright. The two strangers
examined it. The one who seemed to know the house, and whom
the man in the blouse had called "the gunsmith," tried the
mechanism. He passed the weapon to the other, who appeared
less at home there, and kept his back turned to the light.</p>

<p>The gunsmith continued—</p>

<p>"How much?"</p>

<p>The man in the blouse replied—</p>

<p>"I have just brought it from America. Some people bring
monkeys, parrots, and other animals, as if the French people
were savages. For myself I brought this. It is a useful
invention."</p>

<p>"How much?" inquired the gunsmith again.</p>

<p>"It is a pistol which turns and turns."</p>

<p>"How much?"</p>

<p>"Bang! the first fire. Bang! the second fire. Bang! the
third fire. What a hailstorm of bullets! That will do some
execution."</p>

<p>"The price?"</p>

<p>"There are six barrels."</p>

<p>"Well, well, what do you want for it?"</p>

<p>"Six barrels; that is six Louis."</p>

<p>"Will you take five?"</p>

<p>"Impossible. One Louis a ball. That is the price."</p>

<p>"Come, let us do business together. Be reasonable."</p>

<p>"I have named a fair price. Examine the weapon, Mr.
Gunsmith."</p>

<p>"I have examined it."</p>

<p>"The barrel twists and turns like Talleyrand himself. The
weapon ought to be mentioned in the <i>Dictionary of Weathercocks</i>.
It is a gem."</p>

<p>"I have looked at it."</p>

<p>"The barrels are of Spanish make."</p>

<p>"I see they are."</p>

<p>"They are twisted. This is how this twisting is done. They
empty into a forge the basket of a collector of old iron. They
fill it full of these old scraps, with old nails, and broken horseshoes
swept out of farriers' shops."</p>

<p>"And old sickle-blades."</p>

<p>"I was going to say so, Mr. Gunsmith. They apply to all
this rubbish a good sweating heat, and this makes a magnificent
material for gun-barrels."</p>

<p>"Yes; but it may have cracks, flaws, or crosses."</p>

<p>"True; but they remedy the crosses by little twists, and
avoid the risk of doublings by beating hard. They bring their
mass of iron under the great hammer; give it two more good
sweating heats. If the iron has been heated too much, they
re-temper it with dull heats, and lighter hammers. And then
they take out their stuff and roll it well; and with this iron
they manufacture you a weapon like this."</p>

<p>"You are in the trade, I suppose?"</p>

<p>"I am of all trades."</p>

<p>"The barrels are pale-coloured."</p>

<p>"That's the beauty of them, Mr. Gunsmith. The tint is
obtained with antimony."</p>

<p>"It is settled, then, that we give you five Louis?"</p>

<p>"Allow me to observe that I had the honour of saying six."</p>

<p>The gunsmith lowered his voice.</p>

<p>"Hark you, master. Take advantage of the opportunity.
Get rid of this thing. A weapon of this kind is of no use to a
man like you. It will make you remarked."</p>

<p>"It is very true," said the Parisian. "It is rather conspicuous.
It is more suited to a gentleman."</p>

<p>"Will you take five Louis?"</p>

<p>"No, six; one for every shot."</p>

<p>"Come, six Napoleons."</p>

<p>"I will have six Louis."</p>

<p>"You are not a Bonapartist, then. You prefer a Louis to a
Napoleon."</p>

<p>The Parisian nicknamed "Redskin" smiled.</p>

<p>"A Napoleon is greater," said he, "but a Louis is worth
more."</p>

<p>"Six Napoleons."</p>

<p>"Six Louis. It makes a difference to me of four-and-twenty
francs."</p>

<p>"The bargain is off in that case."</p>

<p>"Good: I keep the toy."</p>

<p>"Keep it."</p>

<p>"Beating me down! a good idea! It shall never be said
that I got rid like that of a wonderful specimen of ingenuity."</p>

<p>"Good-night, then."</p>

<p>"It marks a whole stage in the progress of making pistols,
which the Chesapeake Indians call Nortay-u-Hah."</p>

<p>"Five Louis, ready money. Why, it is a handful of gold."</p>

<p>"'Nortay-u-Hah,' that signifies 'short gun.' A good many
people don't know that."</p>

<p>"Will you take five Louis, and just a bit of silver?"</p>

<p>"I said six, master."</p>

<p>The man who kept his back to the candle, and who had not
yet spoken, was spending his time during the dialogue in turning
and testing the mechanism of the pistol. He approached
the armourer's ear and whispered—</p>

<p>"Is it a good weapon?"</p>

<p>"Excellent."</p>

<p>"I will give the six Louis."</p>

<p>Five minutes afterwards, while the Parisian nicknamed
"Redskin" was depositing the six Louis which he had just
received in a secret slit under the breast of his blouse, the
armourer and his companion carrying the revolver in his
trousers pocket, stepped out into the straggling street.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VIII</h4>

<h5>A "CANNON" OFF THE RED BALL AND THE BLACK</h5>


<p>On the morrow, which was a Thursday, a tragic circumstance
occurred at a short distance from St. Malo, near the peak of
the "Décollé," a spot where the cliff is high and the sea deep.</p>

<p>A line of rocks in the form of the top of a lance, and connecting
themselves with the land by a narrow isthmus, stretch out
there into the water, ending abruptly with a large peak-shaped
breaker. Nothing is commoner in the architecture of the sea.
In attempting to reach the plateau of the peaked rock from the
shore, it was necessary to follow an inclined plane, the ascent of
which was here and there somewhat steep.</p>

<p>It was upon a plateau of this kind, towards four o'clock in
the afternoon, that a man was standing, enveloped in a large
military cape, and armed; a fact easy to be perceived from
certain straight and angular folds in his mantle. The summit
on which this man was resting was a rather extensive platform,
dotted with large masses of rock, like enormous paving-stones,
leaving between them narrow passages. This platform, on
which a kind of thick, short grass grew here and there, came to
an end on the sea side in an open space, leading to a perpendicular
escarpment. The escarpment, rising about sixty feet
above the level of the sea, seemed cut down by the aid of a
plumb-line. Its left angle, however, was broken away, and
formed one of those natural staircases common to granite cliffs
worn by the sea, the steps of which are somewhat inconvenient,
requiring sometimes the strides of a giant or the leaps of an
acrobat. These stages of rock descended perpendicularly to
the sea, where they were lost. It was a break-neck place.
However, in case of absolute necessity, a man might succeed in
embarking there, under the very wall of the cliff.</p>

<p>A breeze was sweeping the sea. The man wrapped in his
cape and standing firm, with his left hand grasping his right
shoulder, closed one eye, and applied the other to a telescope.
He seemed absorbed in anxious scrutiny. He had approached
the edge of the escarpment, and stood there motionless, his
gaze immovably fixed on the horizon. The tide was high;
the waves were beating below against the foot of the cliffs.</p>

<p>The object which the stranger was observing was a vessel in
the offing, and which was manœuvring in a strange manner.
The vessel, which had hardly left the port of St. Malo an hour,
had stopped behind the Banquetiers. It had not cast anchor,
perhaps because the bottom would only have permitted it to
bear to leeward on the edge of the cable, and because the ship
would have strained on her anchor under the cutwater. Her
captain had contented himself with lying-to.</p>

<p>The stranger, who was a coast-guardman, as was apparent
from his uniform cape, watched all the movements of the three-master,
and seemed to note them mentally. The vessel was
lying-to, a little off the wind, which was indicated by the backing
of the small topsail, and the bellying of the main-topsail.
She had squared the mizen, and set the topmast as close as
possible, and in such a manner as to work the sails against each
other, and to make little way either on or off shore. Her
captain evidently did not care to expose his vessel much to the
wind, for he had only braced up the small mizen-topsail. In
this way, coming crossway on, he did not drift at the utmost
more than half a league an hour.</p>

<p>It was still broad daylight, particularly on the open sea, and
on the heights of the cliff. The shores below were becoming
dark.</p>

<p>The coast-guardman, still engaged in his duty, and carefully
scanning the offing, had not thought of observing the rocks at
his side and at his feet. He turned his back towards the difficult
sort of causeway which formed the communication between
his resting-place and the shore. He did not, therefore, remark
that something was moving in that direction. Behind a fragment
of rock, among the steps of that causeway, something like
the figure of a man had been concealed, according to all appearances,
since the arrival of the coast-guardman. From time to
time a head issued from the shadow behind the rock; looked
up and watched the watcher. The head, surmounted by a
wide-brimmed American hat, was that of the Quaker-looking
man, who, ten days before, was talking among the stones of the
Petit-Bey to Captain Zuela.</p>

<p>Suddenly, the curiosity of the coast-guardman seemed to be
still more strongly awakened. He polished the glass of his
telescope quickly with his sleeve, and brought it to bear closely
upon the three-master.</p>

<p>A little black spot seemed to detach itself from her side.</p>

<p>The black spot, looking like a small insect upon the water,
was a boat.</p>

<p>The boat seemed to be making for the shore. It was manned
by several sailors, who were pulling vigorously.</p>

<p>She pulled crosswise by little and little, and appeared to be
approaching the Pointe du Décollé.</p>

<p>The gaze of the coast-guardman seemed to have reached its
most intense point. No movement of the boat escaped it. He
had approached nearer still to the verge of the rock.</p>

<p>At that instant a man of large stature appeared on one of
the rocks behind him. It was the Quaker. The officer did not
see him.</p>

<p>The man paused an instant, his arms at his sides, but with
his fists doubled; and with the eye of a hunter, watching for his
prey, he observed the back of the officer.</p>

<p>Four steps only separated them. He put one foot forward,
then stopped; took a second step, and stopped again. He
made no movement except the act of walking; all the rest of
his body was motionless as a statue. His foot fell upon the
tufts of grass without noise. He made a third step, and paused
again. He was almost within reach of the coast-guard, who
stood there still motionless with his telescope. The man
brought his two closed fists to a level with his collar-bone, then
struck out his arms sharply, and his two fists, as if thrown from
a sling, struck the coast-guardman on the two shoulders. The
shock was decisive. The coast-guardman had not the time to
utter a cry. He fell head first from the height of the rock into
the sea. His boots appeared in the air about the time occupied
by a flash of lightning. It was like the fall of a stone in the sea,
which instantly closed over him.</p>

<p>Two or three circles widened out upon the dark water.</p>

<p>Nothing remained but the telescope, which had dropped
from the hands of the man, and lay upon the turf.</p>

<p>The Quaker leaned over the edge of the escarpment a moment,
watched the circles vanishing on the water, waited a few
minutes, and then rose again, singing in a low voice:</p>

<p><span style="margin-left: 8em;">"The captain of police is dead,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 8em;">Through having lost his life."</span>
</p>

<p>He knelt down a second time. Nothing reappeared. Only
at the spot where the officer had been engulfed, he observed
on the surface of the water a sort of dark spot, which became
diffused with the gentle lapping of the waves. It seemed
probable that the coast-guardman had fractured his skull
against some rock under water, and that his blood caused the
spot in the foam. The Quaker, while considering the meaning
of this spot, began to sing again:</p>

<p><span style="margin-left: 8em;">"Not very long before he died,</span><br />
<span style="margin-left: 8em;">The luckless man was still alive."</span>
</p>

<p>He did not finish his song.</p>

<p>He heard an extremely soft voice behind him, which said:</p>

<p>"Is that you, Rantaine? Good-day. You have just killed
a man!"</p>

<p>He turned. About fifteen paces behind him, in one of the
passages between the rocks, stood a little man holding a revolver
in his hand.</p>

<p>The Quaker answered:</p>

<p>"As you see. Good-day, Sieur Clubin."</p>

<p>The little man started.</p>

<p>"You know me?"</p>

<p>"You knew me very well," replied Rantaine.</p>

<p>Meanwhile they could hear a sound of oars on the sea. It
was the approach of the boat which the officer had observed.</p>

<p>Sieur Clubin said in a low tone, as if speaking to himself:</p>

<p>"It was done quickly."</p>

<p>"What can I do to oblige you?" asked Rantaine.</p>

<p>"Oh, a trifling matter! It is very nearly ten years since I
saw you. You must have been doing well. How are you?"</p>

<p>"Well enough," answered Rantaine. "How are you?"</p>

<p>"Very well," replied Clubin.</p>

<p>Rantaine advanced a step towards Clubin.</p>

<p>A little sharp click caught his ear. It was Sieur Clubin who
was cocking his revolver.</p>

<p>"Rantaine, there are about fifteen paces between us. It is a
nice distance. Remain where you are."</p>

<p>"Very well," said Rantaine. "What do you want with
me?"</p>

<p>"I! Oh, I have come to have a chat with you."</p>

<p>Rantaine did not offer to move again. Sieur Clubin continued:</p>

<p>"You assassinated a coast-guardman just now."</p>

<p>Rantaine lifted the flap of his hat, and replied:</p>

<p>"You have already done me the honour to mention it."</p>

<p>"Exactly; but in terms less precise. I said a man: I say
now, a coast-guardman. The man wore the number 619. He
was the father of a family; leaves a wife and five children."</p>

<p>"That is no doubt correct," said Rantaine.</p>

<p>There was a momentary pause.</p>

<p>"They are picked men—those coast-guard people," continued
Clubin; "almost all old sailors."</p>

<p>"I have remarked," said Rantaine, "that people generally
do leave a wife and five children."</p>

<p>Sieur Clubin continued:</p>

<p>"Guess how much this revolver cost me?"</p>

<p>"It is a pretty tool," said Rantaine.</p>

<p>"What do you guess it at?"</p>

<p>"I should guess it at a good deal."</p>

<p>"It cost me one hundred and forty-four francs."</p>

<p>"You must have bought that," said Rantaine, "at the shop
in the Ruelle Coutanchez."</p>

<p>Clubin continued:</p>

<p>"He did not cry out. The fall stopped his voice, no doubt."</p>

<p>"Sieur Clubin, there will be a breeze to-night."</p>

<p>"I am the only one in the secret."</p>

<p>"Do you still stay at the Jean Auberge?"</p>

<p>"Yes: you are not badly served there."</p>

<p>"I remember getting some excellent sour-krout there."</p>

<p>"You must be exceedingly strong, Rantaine. What
shoulders you have! I should be sorry to get a tap from you.
I, on the other hand, when I came into the world, looked so
spare and sickly, that they despaired of rearing me."</p>

<p>"They succeeded though; which was lucky."</p>

<p>"Yes: I still stay at the Jean Auberge."</p>

<p>"Do you know, Sieur Clubin, how I recognised you? It was
from your having recognised me. I said to myself, there is
nobody like Sieur Clubin for that."</p>

<p>And he advanced a step.</p>

<p>"Stand back where you were, Rantaine."</p>

<p>Rantaine fell back, and said to himself:</p>

<p>"A fellow becomes like a child before one of those weapons."</p>

<p>Sieur Clubin continued:</p>

<p>"The position of affairs is this: we have on our right, in the
direction of St. Enogat, at about three hundred paces from
here, another coast-guardman—his number is 618—who is still
alive; and on our left, in the direction of St. Lunaire—a customs
station. That makes seven armed men who could be here, if
necessary, in five minutes. The rock would be surrounded;
the way hither guarded. Impossible to elude them. There is
a corpse at the foot of this rock."</p>

<p>Rantaine took a side-way glance at the revolver.</p>

<p>"As you say, Rantaine, it is a pretty tool. Perhaps it is
only loaded with powder; but what does that matter? A
report would be enough to bring an armed force—and I have
six barrels here."</p>

<p>The measured sound of the oars became very distinct. The
boat was not far off.</p>

<p>The tall man regarded the little man curiously. Sieur Clubin
spoke in a voice more and more soft and subdued.</p>

<p>"Rantaine, the men in the boat which is coming, knowing
what you did here just now, would lend a hand and help to
arrest you. You are to pay Captain Zuela ten thousand francs
for your passage. You would have made a better bargain, by
the way, with the smugglers of Pleinmont; but they would only
have taken you to England; and besides, you cannot risk going
to Guernsey, where they have the pleasure of knowing you. To
return, then, to the position of affairs—if I fire, you are arrested.
You are to pay Zuela for your passage ten thousand francs.
You have already paid him five thousand in advance. Zuela
would keep the five thousand and be gone. These are the facts.
Rantaine, you have managed your masquerading very well.
That hat—that queer coat—and those gaiters make a wonderful
change. You forgot the spectacles; but did right to let
your whiskers grow."</p>

<p>Rantaine smiled spasmodically. Clubin continued:</p>

<p>"Rantaine, you have on a pair of American breeches, with
a double fob. In one side you keep your watch. Take care
of it."</p>

<p>"Thank you, Sieur Clubin."</p>

<p>"In the other is a little box made of wrought iron, which
opens and shuts with a spring. It is an old sailor's tobacco-box.
Take it out of your pocket, and throw it over to me."</p>

<p>"Why, this is robbery."</p>

<p>"You are at liberty to call the coast-guardman."</p>

<p>And Clubin fixed his eye on Rantaine.</p>

<p>"Stay, Mess Clubin," said Rantaine, making a slight forward
movement, and holding out his open hand.</p>

<p>The title "Mess" was a delicate flattery.</p>

<p>"Stay where you are, Rantaine."</p>

<p>"Mess Clubin, let us come to terms. I offer you half."</p>

<p>Clubin crossed his arms, still showing the barrels of his
revolver.</p>

<p>"Rantaine, what do you take me for? I am an honest man."</p>

<p>And he added after a pause:</p>

<p>"I must have the whole."</p>

<p>Rantaine muttered between his teeth, "This fellow's of a
stern sort."</p>

<p>The eye of Clubin lighted up, his voice became clear and
sharp as steel. He cried:</p>

<p>"I see that you are labouring under a mistake. Robbery
is your name, not mine. My name is Restitution. Hark you,
Rantaine. Ten years ago you left Guernsey one night, taking
with you the cash-box of a certain partnership concern, containing
fifty thousand francs which belonged to you, but forgetting
to leave behind you fifty thousand francs which were
the property of another. Those fifty thousand francs, the
money of your partner, the excellent and worthy Mess Lethierry,
make at present, at compound interest, calculated for ten years,
eighty thousand six hundred and sixty-six francs. You went
into a money-changer's yesterday. I'll give you his name—Rébuchet,
in St. Vincent Street. You counted out to him
seventy-six thousand francs in French bank-notes; in exchange
for which he gave you three notes of the Bank of England for
one thousand pounds sterling each, plus the exchange. You
put these bank-notes in the iron tobacco-box, and the iron
tobacco-box into your double fob on the right-hand side. On
the part of Mess Lethierry, I shall be content with that. I start
to-morrow for Guernsey, and intend to hand it to him. Rantaine,
the three-master lying-to out yonder is the <i>Tamaulipas</i>.
You have had your luggage put aboard there with the other
things belonging to the crew. You want to leave France. You
have your reasons. You are going to Arequipa. The boat is
coming to fetch you. You are awaiting it. It is at hand. You
can hear it. It depends on me whether you go or stay. No
more words. Fling me the tobacco-box."</p>

<p>Rantaine dipped his hand in the fob, drew out a little box,
and threw it to Clubin. It was the iron tobacco-box. It fell
and rolled at Clubin's feet.</p>

<p>Clubin knelt without lowering his gaze; felt about for the
box with his left hand, keeping all the while his eyes and the
six barrels of the revolver fixed upon Rantaine.</p>

<p>Then he cried:</p>

<p>"Turn your back, my friend."</p>

<p>Rantaine turned his back.</p>

<p>Sieur Clubin put the revolver under one arm, and touched
the spring of the tobacco-box. The lid flew open.</p>

<p>It contained four bank-notes; three of a thousand pounds,
and one of ten pounds.</p>

<p>He folded up the three bank-notes of a thousand pounds each,
replaced them in the iron tobacco-box, shut the lid again, and
put it in his pocket.</p>

<p>Then he picked up a stone, wrapped it in the ten-pound note,
and said:</p>

<p>"You may turn round again."</p>

<p>Rantaine turned.</p>

<p>Sieur Clubin continued:</p>

<p>"I told you I would be contented with three thousand
pounds. Here, I return you ten pounds."</p>

<p>And he threw to Rantaine the note enfolding the stone.</p>

<p>Rantaine, with a movement of his foot, sent the bank-note
and the stone into the sea.</p>

<p>"As you please," said Clubin. "You must be rich. I am
satisfied."</p>

<p>The noise of oars, which had been continually drawing nearer
during the dialogue, ceased. They knew by this that the boat
had arrived at the base of the cliff.</p>

<p>"Your vehicle waits below. You can go, Rantaine."</p>

<p>Rantaine advanced towards the steps of stones, and rapidly
disappeared.</p>

<p>Clubin moved cautiously towards the edge of the escarpment,
and watched him descending.</p>

<p>The boat had stopped near the last stage of the rocks, at the
very spot where the coast-guardman had fallen.</p>

<p>Still observing Rantaine stepping from stone to stone, Clubin
muttered:</p>

<p>"A good number 619. He thought himself alone. Rantaine
thought there were only two there. I alone knew that there
were three."</p>

<p>He perceived at his feet the telescope which had dropped from
the hands of the coast-guardman.</p>

<p>The sound of oars was heard again. Rantaine had stepped
into the boat, and the rowers had pushed out to sea.</p>

<p>When Rantaine was safely in the boat, and the cliff was
beginning to recede from his eyes, he arose again abruptly.
His features were convulsed with rage; he clenched his fist and
cried:</p>

<p>"Ha! he is the devil himself; a villain!"</p>

<p>A few seconds later, Clubin, from the top of the rock, while
bringing his telescope to bear upon the boat, heard distinctly
the following words articulated by a loud voice, and mingling
with the noise of the sea:</p>

<p>"Sieur Clubin, you are an honest man; but you will not be
offended if I write to Lethierry to acquaint him with this
matter; and we have here in the boat a sailor from Guernsey,
who is one of the crew of the <i>Tamaulipas</i>; his name is Ahier-Tostevin,
and he will return to St. Malo on Zuela's next voyage,
to bear testimony to the fact of my having returned to you, on
Mess Lethierry's account, the sum of three thousand pounds
sterling."</p>

<p>It was Rantaine's voice.</p>

<p>Clubin rarely did things by halves. Motionless as the coast-guardman
had been, and in the exact same place, his eye still
at the telescope, he did not lose sight of the boat for one moment.
He saw it growing less amidst the waves; watched it disappear
and reappear, and approach the vessel, which was lying-to;
finally he recognised the tall figure of Rantaine on the deck of
the <i>Tamaulipas</i>.</p>

<p>When the boat was raised, and slung again to the davits, the
<i>Tamaulipas</i> was in motion once more. The land-breeze was
fresh, and she spread all her sails. Clubin's glass continued
fixed upon her outline growing more and more indistinct; until
half an hour later, when the <i>Tamaulipas</i> had become only a
dark shape upon the horizon, growing smaller and smaller
against the pale twilight in the sky.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>IX</h4>

<h5>USEFUL INFORMATION FOR PERSONS WHO EXPECT OR FEAR THE
ARRIVAL OF LETTERS FROM BEYOND SEA</h5>


<p>On that evening, Sieur Clubin returned late.</p>

<p>One of the causes of his delay was, that before going to his
inn, he had paid a visit to the Dinan gate of the town, a place
where there were several wine-shops. In one of these wine-shops,
where he was not known, he had bought a bottle of
brandy, which he placed in the pocket of his overcoat, as if he
desired to conceal it. Then, as the Durande was to start on
the following morning, he had taken a turn aboard to satisfy
himself that everything was in order.</p>

<p>When Sieur Clubin returned to the Jean Auberge, there was
no one left in the lower room except the old sea-captain, M.
Gertrais-Gaboureau, who was drinking a jug of ale and smoking
his pipe.</p>

<p>M. Gertrais-Gaboureau saluted Sieur Clubin between a whiff
and a draught of ale.</p>

<p>"How d'ye do, Captain Clubin?"</p>

<p>"Good evening, Captain Gertrais."</p>

<p>"Well, the <i>Tamaulipas</i> is gone."</p>

<p>"Ah!" said Clubin, "I did not observe."</p>

<p>Captain Gertrais-Gaboureau expectorated, and said:</p>

<p>"Zuela has decamped."</p>

<p>"When was that?"</p>

<p>"This evening."</p>

<p>"Where is he gone?"</p>

<p>"To the devil."</p>

<p>"No doubt; but where is that?"</p>

<p>"To Arequipa."</p>

<p>"I knew nothing of it," said Clubin.</p>

<p>He added:</p>

<p>"I am going to bed."</p>

<p>He lighted his candle, walked towards the door, and returned.</p>

<p>"Have you ever been at Arequipa, Captain?"</p>

<p>"Yes; some years ago."</p>

<p>"Where do they touch on that voyage?"</p>

<p>"A little everywhere; but the <i>Tamaulipas</i> will touch
nowhere."</p>

<p>M. Gertrais-Gaboureau emptied his pipe upon the corner of
a plate and continued:</p>

<p>"You know the lugger called the <i>Trojan Horse</i>, and that
fine three-master, the <i>Trentemouzin</i>, which are gone to Cardiff?
I was against their sailing on account of the weather. They
have returned in a fine state. The lugger was laden with turpentine;
she sprang a leak, and in working the pumps they
pumped up with the water all her cargo. As to the three-master,
she has suffered most above water. Her cutwater, her
headrail, the stock of her larboard anchor are broken. Her
standing jibboom is gone clean by the cap. As for the jib-shrouds
and bobstays, go and see what they look like. The
mizenmast is not injured, but has had a severe shock. All the
iron of the bowsprit has given way; and it is an extraordinary
fact that, though the bowsprit itself is not scratched, it is completely
stripped. The larboard-bow of the vessel is stove in
a good three feet square. This is what comes of not taking
advice."</p>

<p>Clubin had placed the candle on the table, and had begun to
readjust a row of pins which he kept in the collar of his overcoat.
He continued:</p>

<p>"Didn't you say, Captain, that the <i>Tamaulipas</i> would not
touch anywhere?"</p>

<p>"Yes; she goes direct to Chili."</p>

<p>"In that case, she can send no news of herself on the voyage."</p>

<p>"I beg your pardon, Captain Clubin. In the first place, she
can send any letters by vessels she may meet sailing for Europe."</p>

<p>"That is true."</p>

<p>"Then there is the ocean letter-box."</p>

<p>"What do you mean by the ocean letter-box?"</p>

<p>"Don't you know what that is, Captain Clubin?"</p>

<p>"No."</p>

<p>"When you pass the straits of Magellan——"</p>

<p>"Well."</p>

<p>"Snow all round you; always bad weather; ugly down-easters,
and bad seas."</p>

<p>"Well."</p>

<p>"When you have doubled Cape Monmouth——"</p>

<p>"Well, what next?"</p>

<p>"Then you double Cape Valentine."</p>

<p>"And then?"</p>

<p>"Why, then you double Cape Isidore."</p>

<p>"And afterwards?"</p>

<p>"You double Point Anne."</p>

<p>"Good. But what is it you call the ocean letter-box?"</p>

<p>"We are coming to that. Mountains on the right, mountains
on the left. Penguins and stormy petrels all about. A terrible
place. Ah! by Jove, what a howling and what cracks you get
there! The hurricane wants no help. That's the place for
holding on to the sheer-rails; for reefing topsails. That's
where you take in the mainsail, and fly the jibsail; or take in
the jibsail and try the stormjib. Gusts upon gusts! And then,
sometimes four, five, or six days of scudding under bare poles.
Often only a rag of canvas left. What a dance! Squalls
enough to make a three-master skip like a flea. I saw once a
cabin-boy hanging on to the jibboom of an English brig, the
<i>True Blue</i>, knocked, jibboom and all, to ten thousand nothings.
Fellows are swept into the air there like butterflies. I saw the
second mate of the <i>Revenue</i>, a pretty schooner, knocked from
under the forecross-tree, and killed dead. I have had my sheer-rails
smashed, and come out with all my sails in ribbons.
Frigates of fifty guns make water like wicker baskets. And the
damnable coast! Nothing can be imagined more dangerous.
Rocks all jagged-edged. You come, by and by, to Port Famine.
There it's worse and worse. The worst seas I ever saw in my
life. The devil's own latitudes. All of a sudden you spy the
words, painted in red, 'Post Office.'"</p>

<p>"What do you mean, Captain Gertrais?"</p>

<p>"I mean, Captain Clubin, that immediately after doubling
Point Anne you see, on a rock, a hundred feet high, a great
post with a barrel suspended to the top. This barrel is the
letter-box. The English sailors must needs go and write up
there 'Post Office.' What had they to do with it? It is the
ocean post-office. It isn't the property of that worthy gentleman,
the King of England. The box is common to all. It
belongs to every flag. <i>Post Office!</i> there's a crack-jaw word
for you. It produces an effect on me as if the devil had
suddenly offered me a cup of tea. I will tell you now how
the postal arrangements are carried out. Every vessel which
passes sends to the post a boat with despatches. A vessel
coming from the Atlantic, for instance, sends there its letters
for Europe; and a ship coming from the Pacific, its letters for
New Zealand or California. The officer in command of the
boat puts his packet into the barrel, and takes away any packet
he finds there. You take charge of these letters, and the ship
which comes after you takes charge of yours. As ships are
always going to and fro, the continent whence you come is that
to which I am going. I carry your letters; you carry mine.
The barrel is made fast to the post with a chain. And it rains,
snows and hails! A pretty sea. The imps of Satan fly about
on every side. The <i>Tamaulipas</i> will pass there. The barrel
has a good lid with a hinge, but no padlock. You see, a fellow
can write to his friends this way. The letters come safely."</p>

<p>"It is very curious," muttered Clubin thoughtfully.</p>

<p>Captain Gertrais-Gaboureau returned to his bottle of ale.</p>

<p>"If that vagabond Zuela should write (continued Clubin
aside), the scoundrel puts his scrawl into the barrel at Magellan,
and in four months I have his letter."</p>

<p>"Well, Captain Clubin, do you start to-morrow?"</p>

<p>Clubin, absorbed in a sort of somnambulism, did not notice
the question; and Captain Gertrais repeated it.</p>

<p>Clubin woke up.</p>

<p>"Of course, Captain Gertrais. It is my day. I must start
to-morrow morning."</p>

<p>"If it was my case, I shouldn't, Captain Clubin. The hair
of the dog's coat feels damp. For two nights past, the sea-birds
have been flying wildly round the lanthorn of the lighthouse.
A bad sign. I have a storm-glass, too, which gives
me a warning. The moon is at her second quarter; it is the
maximum of humidity. I noticed to-day some pimpernels with
their leaves shut, and a field of clover with its stalks all stiff.
The worms come out of the ground to-day; the flies sting; the
bees keep close to their hives; the sparrows chatter together.
You can hear the sound of bells from far off. I heard to-night
the Angelus at St. Lunaire. And then the sun set angry.
There will be a good fog to-morrow, mark my words. I don't
advise you to put to sea. I dread the fog a good deal more than
a hurricane. It's a nasty neighbour that."</p>



