<h4>I</h4>

<h5>THE PLACE WHICH IS DIFFICULT TO REACH, AND DIFFICULT
TO LEAVE</h5>


<p>The bark which had been observed at so many points on the
coast of Guernsey on the previous evening was, as the reader
has guessed, the old Dutch barge or sloop. Gilliatt had chosen
the channel along the coast among the rocks. It was the most
dangerous way, but it was the most direct. To take the shortest
route was his only thought. Shipwrecks will not wait; the sea
is a pressing creditor; an hour's delay may be irreparable. His
anxiety was to go quickly to the rescue of the machinery in
danger.</p>

<p>One of his objects in leaving Guernsey was to avoid arousing
attention. He set out like one escaping from justice, and seemed
anxious to hide from human eyes. He shunned the eastern
coast, as if he did not care to pass in sight of St. Sampson and
St. Peter's Port, and glided silently along the opposite coast,
which is comparatively uninhabited. Among the breakers, it
was necessary to ply the oars; but Gilliatt managed them on
scientific principles; taking the water quietly, and dropping it
with exact regularity, he was able to move in the darkness with
as little noise and as rapidly as possible. So stealthy were his
movements, that he might have seemed to be bent upon some
evil errand.</p>

<p>In truth, though embarking desperately in an enterprise
which might well be called impossible, and risking his life with
nearly every chance against him, he feared nothing but the
possibility of some rival in the work which he had set before him.</p>

<p>As the day began to break, those unknown eyes which look
down upon the world from boundless space might have beheld,
at one of the most dangerous and solitary spots at sea, two
objects, the distance between which was gradually decreasing,
as the one was approaching the other. One, which was almost
imperceptible in the wide movement of the waters, was a sailing
boat. In this was a man. It was the sloop. The other, black,
motionless, colossal, rose above the waves, a singular form.
Two tall pillars issuing from the sea bore aloft a sort of cross-beam
which was like a bridge between them. This bridge, so
singular in shape that it was impossible to imagine what it was
from a distance, touched each of the two pillars. It resembled
a vast portal. Of what use could such an erection be in that open
plain, the sea, which stretched around it far and wide? It might
have been imagined to be a Titanic Cromlech, planted there in
mid-ocean by an imperious whim, and built up by hands accustomed
to proportion their labours to the great deep. Its wild
outline stood well-defined against the clear sky.</p>

<p>The morning light was growing stronger in the east; the
whiteness in the horizon deepened the shadow on the sea. In
the opposite sky the moon was sinking.</p>

<p>The two perpendicular forms were the Douvres. The huge
mass held fast between them, like an architrave between two
pillars, was the wreck of the Durande.</p>

<p>The rock, thus holding fast and exhibiting its prey, was
terrible to behold. Inanimate things look sometimes as if
endowed with a dark and hostile spirit towards man. There
was a menace in the attitude of the rocks. They seemed to be
biding their time.</p>

<p>Nothing could be more suggestive of haughtiness and arrogance
than their whole appearance: the conquered vessel; the
triumphant abyss. The two rocks, still streaming with the
tempest of the day before, were like two wrestlers sweating from
a recent struggle. The wind had sunk; the sea rippled gently;
here and there the presence of breakers might be detected in the
graceful streaks of foam upon the surface of the waters. A sound
came from the sea like the murmuring of bees. All around was
level except the Douvres, rising straight, like two black columns.
Up to a certain height they were completely bearded with seaweed;
above this their steep haunches glittered at points like
polished armour. They seemed ready to commence the strife
again. The beholder felt that they were rooted deep in mountains
whose summits were beneath the sea. Their aspect was
full of a sort of tragic power.</p>

<p>Ordinarily the sea conceals her crimes. She delights in
privacy. Her unfathomable deeps keep silence. She wraps
herself in a mystery which rarely consents to give up its secrets.
We know her savage nature, but who can tell the extent of her
dark deeds? She is at once open and secret; she hides away
carefully, and cares not to divulge her actions; wrecks a vessel,
and, covering it with the waves, engulfs it deep, as if conscious
of her guilt. Among her crimes is hypocrisy. She slays and
steals, conceals her booty, puts on an air of unconsciousness,
and smiles.</p>

<p>Here, however, was nothing of the kind. The Douvres,
lifting above the level of the waters the shattered hull of the
Durande, had an air of triumph. The imagination might have
pictured them as two monstrous arms, reaching upwards from
the gulf, and exhibiting to the tempest the lifeless body of the
ship. Their aspect was like that of an assassin boasting of his
evil deeds.</p>

<p>The solemnity of the hour contributed something to the impression
of the scene. There is a mysterious grandeur in the
dawn, as of the border-land between the region of consciousness
and the world of our dreams. There is something spectral
in that confused transition time. The immense form of the
two Douvres, like a capital letter H, the Durande forming its
cross stroke, appeared against the horizon in all their twilight
majesty.</p>

<p>Gilliatt was attired in his seaman's clothing: a Guernsey
shirt, woollen stockings, thick shoes, a homespun jacket, trousers
of thick stuff, with pockets, and a cap upon his head of red
worsted, of a kind then much in use among sailors, and known
in the last century as a <i>galérienne</i>.</p>

<p>He recognised the rocks, and steered towards them.</p>

<p>The situation of the Durande was exactly the contrary of
that of a vessel gone to the bottom: it was a vessel suspended
in the air.</p>

<p>No problem more strange was ever presented to a salvor.</p>

<p>It was broad daylight when Gilliatt arrived in the waters
about the rock.</p>

<p>As we have said, there was but little sea. The slight agitation
of the water was due almost entirely to its confinement among
the rocks. Every passage, small or large, is subject to this
chopping movement. The inside of a channel is always more
or less white with foam. Gilliatt did not approach the Douvres
without caution.</p>

<p>He cast the sounding lead several times.</p>

<p>He had a cargo to disembark.</p>

<p>Accustomed to long absences, he had at home a number of
necessaries always ready. He had brought a sack of biscuit,
another of rye-meal, a basket of salt fish and smoked beef, a
large can of fresh water; a Norwegian chest painted with
flowers, containing several coarse woollen shirts, his tarpaulin
and his waterproof overalls, and a sheepskin which he was
accustomed to throw at night over his clothes. On leaving the
Bû de la Rue he had put all these things hastily into the barge,
with the addition of a large loaf. In his hurry he had brought
no other tools but his huge forge-hammer, his chopper and
hatchet, and a knotted rope. Furnished with a grappling-iron
and with a ladder of that sort, the steepest rocks become accessible,
and a good sailor will find it possible to scale the rudest
escarpment. In the island of Sark the visitor may see what
the fishermen of the Havre Gosselin can accomplish with a
knotted cord.</p>

<p>His nets and lines and all his fishing apparatus were in the
barge. He had placed them there mechanically and by habit;
for he intended, if his enterprise continued, to sojourn for some
time in an archipelago of rocks and breakers, where fishing nets
and tackle are of little use.</p>

<p>At the moment when Gilliatt was skirting the great rock the
sea was retiring; a circumstance favourable to his purpose.
The departing tide laid bare, at the foot of the smaller Douvre,
one or two table-rocks, horizontal, or only slightly inclined, and
bearing a fanciful resemblance to boards supported by crows.
These table-rocks, sometimes narrow, sometimes broad, standing
at unequal distances along the side of the great perpendicular
column, were continued in the form of a thin cornice up to a
spot just beneath the Durande, the hull of which stood swelling
out between the two rocks. The wreck was held fast there as
in a vice.</p>

<p>This series of platforms was convenient for approaching and
surveying the position. It was convenient also for disembarking
the contents of the barge provisionally; but it was necessary to
hasten, for it was only above water for a few hours. With the
rising tide the table-rocks would be again beneath the foam.</p>

<p>It was before these table-rocks, some level, some slanting,
that Gilliatt pushed in and brought the barge to a stand. A
thick mass of wet and slippery sea-wrack covered them, rendered
more slippery here and there by their inclined surfaces.</p>

<p>Gilliatt pulled off his shoes and sprang bare-footed on to the
slimy weeds, and made fast the barge to a point of rock.</p>

<p>Then he advanced as far as he could along the granite cornice,
reached the rock immediately beneath the wreck, looked up,
and examined it.</p>

<p>The Durande had been caught suspended, and, as it were,
fitted in between the two rocks, at about twenty feet above the
water. It must have been a heavy sea which had cast her
there.</p>

<p>Such effects from furious seas have nothing surprising for those
who are familiar with the ocean. To cite one example only:—On
the 25th January 1840, in the Gulf of Stora, a tempest
struck with its expiring force a brig, and casting it almost intact
completely over the broken wreck of the corvette <i>La Marne</i>,
fixed it immovable, bowsprit first, in a gap between the cliffs.</p>

<p>The Douvres, however, held only a part of the Durande.</p>

<p>The vessel snatched from the waves had been, as it were,
uprooted from the waters by the hurricane. A whirlwind had
wrenched it against the counteracting force of the rolling waves,
and the vessel thus caught in contrary directions by the two
claws of the tempest had snapped like a lath. The after-part
with the engine and the paddles, lifted out of the foam and
driven by all the fury of the cyclone into the defile of the
Douvres, had plunged in up to her midship beam, and remained
there. The blow had been well directed. To drive it in this
fashion between the two rocks, the storm had struck it as with
an enormous hammer. The forecastle carried away and rolled
down by the sea, had gone to fragments among the breakers.</p>

<p>The hold, broken in, had scattered out the bodies of the
drowned cattle upon the sea.</p>

<p>A large portion of the forward side and bulwarks still hung
to the riders by the larboard paddle-box, and by some shattered
braces easy to strike off with the blow of a hatchet.</p>

<p>Here and there, among beams, planks, rags of canvas, pieces
of chains, and other remains of wreck were seen lying about
among the rugged fragments of shattered rock.</p>

<p>Gilliatt surveyed the Durande attentively. The keel formed
a roofing over his head.</p>

<p>A serene sky stretched far and wide over the waters, scarcely
wrinkled with a passing breath. The sun rose gloriously in the
midst of the vast azure circle.</p>

<p>From time to time a drop of water was detached from the
wreck and fell into the sea.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>II</h4>

<h5>A CATALOGUE OF DISASTERS</h5>


<p>The Douvres differed in shape as well as in height.</p>

<p>Upon the Little Douvre, which was curved and pointed, long
veins of reddish-coloured rock, of a comparatively soft kind,
could be seen branching out and dividing the interior of the
granite. At the edges of these red dykes were fractures, favourable
to climbing. One of these fractures, situated a little above
the wreck, had been so laboriously worn and scooped out by
the splashing of the waves, that it had become a sort of niche,
in which it would have been quite possible to place a statue.
The granite of the Little Douvre was rounded at the surface,
and, to the feel at least, soft like touchstone; but this feeling
detracted nothing from its durability. The Little Douvre terminated
in a point like a horn. The Great Douvre, polished,
smooth, glossy, perpendicular, and looking as if cut out by the
builder's square, was in one piece, and seemed made of black
ivory. Not a hole, not a break in its smooth surface. The
escarpment looked inhospitable. A convict could not have
used it for escape, nor a bird for a place for its nest. On the
summit there was a horizontal surface as upon "The Man Rock;"
but the summit of the Great Douvre was inaccessible.</p>

<p>It was possible to scale the Little Douvre, but not to remain
on the summit; it would have been possible to rest on the
summit of the Great Douvre, but impossible to scale it.</p>

<p>Gilliatt, having rapidly surveyed the situation of affairs,
returned to the barge, landed its contents upon the largest of
the horizontal cornice rocks, made of the whole compact mass
a sort of bale, which he rolled up in tarpaulin, fitted a sling rope
to it with a hoisting block, pushed the package into a corner of
the rocks where the waves could not reach it, and then clutching
the Little Douvre with his hands, and holding on with his naked
feet, he clambered from projection to projection, and from niche
to niche, until he found himself level with the wrecked vessel
high up in the air.</p>

<p>Having reached the height of the paddles, he sprang upon the
poop.</p>

<p>The interior of the wreck presented a mournful aspect.</p>

<p>Traces of a great struggle were everywhere visible. There
were plainly to be seen the frightful ravages of the sea and wind.
The action of the tempest resembles the violence of a band of
pirates. Nothing is more like the victim of a criminal outrage
than a wrecked ship violated and stripped by those terrible
accomplices, the storm-cloud, the thunder, the rain, the squall,
the waves, and the breakers.</p>

<p>Standing upon the dismantled deck, it was natural to dream
of the presence of something like a furious stamping of the
spirits of the storm. Everywhere around were the marks of
their rage. The strange contortions of certain portions of the
ironwork bore testimony to the terrific force of the winds. The
between-decks were like the cell of a lunatic, in which everything
has been broken.</p>

<p>No wild beast can compare with the sea for mangling its prey.
The waves are full of talons. The north wind bites, the billows
devour, the waves are like hungry jaws. The ocean strikes like
a lion with its heavy paw, seizing and dismembering at the same
moment.</p>

<p>The ruin conspicuous in the Durande presented the peculiarity
of being detailed and minute. It was a sort of horrible
stripping and plucking. Much of it seemed done with design.
The beholder was tempted to exclaim, "What wanton
mischief!" The ripping of the planking was edged here and
there artistically. This peculiarity is common with the ravages
of the cyclone. To chip and tear away is the caprice of the great
devastator. Its ways are like those of the professional torturer.
The disasters which it causes wear a look of ingenious punishments.
One might fancy it actuated by the worst passions of
man. It refines in cruelty like a savage. While it is exterminating
it dissects bone by bone. It torments its victim, avenges
itself, and takes delight in its work. It even appears to descend
to petty acts of malice.</p>

<p>Cyclones are rare in our latitudes, and are, for that reason,
the more dangerous, being generally unexpected. A rock in
the path of a heavy wind may become the pivot of a storm. It
is probable that the squall had thus rotated upon the point of
the Douvres, and had turned suddenly into a waterspout on
meeting the shock of the rocks, a fact which explained the casting
of the vessel so high among them. When the cyclone blows,
a vessel is of no more weight in the wind than a stone in a sling.</p>

<p>The damage received by the Durande was like the wound of
a man cut in twain. It was a divided trunk from which issued
a mass of <i>débris</i> like the entrails of a body. Various kinds of
cordage hung floating and trembling, chains swung chattering;
the fibres and nerves of the vessel were there naked and exposed.
What was not smashed was disjointed.</p>

<p>Fragments of the sheeting resembled currycombs bristling
with nails; everything bore the appearance of ruin; a handspike
had become nothing but a piece of iron; a sounding-lead,
nothing but a lump of metal; a dead-eye had become a mere
piece of wood; a halliard, an end of rope; a strand of cord, a
tangled skein; a bolt-rope, a thread in the hem of a sail. All
around was the lamentable work of demolition. Nothing
remained that was not unhooked, unnailed, cracked, wasted,
warped, pierced with holes, destroyed: nothing hung together
in the dreadful mass, but all was torn, dislocated, broken.
There was that air of drift which characterises the scene of all
struggles—from the melées of men, which are called battles, to
the melées of the elements, to which we give the name of chaos.
Everything was sinking and dropping away; a rolling mass of
planks, panelling, ironwork, cables, and beams had been arrested
just at the great fracture of the hull, whence the least additional
shock must have precipitated them into the sea. What remained
of her powerful frame, once so triumphant, was cracked
here and there, showing through large apertures the dismal
gloom within.</p>

<p>The foam from below spat its flakes contemptuously upon
this broken and forlorn outcast of the sea.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>III</h4>

<h5>SOUND; BUT NOT SAFE</h5>


<p>Gilliatt did not expect to find only a portion of the ship existing.
Nothing in the description, in other respects so precise, of
the captain of the <i>Shealtiel</i> had led him to anticipate this
division of the vessel in the centre. It was probable that the
"diabolical crash" heard by the captain of the <i>Shealtiel</i> marked
the moment when this destruction had taken place under the
blows of a tremendous sea. The captain had, doubtless, worn
ship just before this last heavy squall; and what he had taken
for a great sea was probably a waterspout. Later, when he drew
nearer to observe the wreck, he had only been able to see the
stern of the vessel—the remainder, that is to say, the large opening
where the fore-part had given way, having been concealed
from him among the masses of rock.</p>

<p>With that exception, the information given by the captain of
the <i>Shealtiel</i> was strictly correct. The hull was useless, but the
engine remained intact.</p>

<p>Such chances are common in the history of shipwreck. The
logic of disaster at sea is beyond the grasp of human science.</p>

<p>The masts having snapped short, had fallen over the side;
the chimney was not even bent. The great iron plating which
supported the machinery had kept it together, and in one piece.
The planks of the paddle-boxes were disjointed, like the leaves
of wooden sunblinds; but through their apertures the paddles
themselves could be seen in good condition. A few of their
floats only were missing.</p>

<p>Besides the machinery, the great stern capstan had resisted
the destruction. Its chain was there, and, thanks to its firm
fixture in a frame of joists, might still be of service, unless the
strain of the voyal should break away the planking. The flooring
of the deck bent at almost every point, and was tottering
throughout.</p>

<p>On the other hand, the trunk of the hull, fixed between the
Douvres, held together, as we have already said, and it appeared
strong.</p>

<p>There was something like derision in this preservation of the
machinery; something which added to the irony of the misfortune.
The sombre malice of the unseen powers of mischief
displays itself sometimes in such bitter mockeries. The
machinery was saved, but its preservation did not make it any
the less lost. The ocean seemed to have kept it only to demolish
it at leisure. It was like the playing of the cat with her prey.</p>

<p>Its fate was to suffer there and to be dismembered day by
day. It was to be the plaything of the savage amusements of
the sea. It was slowly to dwindle, and, as it were, to melt away.
For what could be done? That this vast block of mechanism
and gear, at once massive and delicate, condemned to fixity by
its weight, delivered up in that solitude to the destructive
elements, exposed in the gripe of the rock to the action of the
wind and wave, could, under the frown of that implacable spot,
escape from slow destruction, seemed a madness even to imagine.</p>

<p>The Durande was the captive of the Douvres.</p>

<p>How could she be extricated from that position?</p>

<p>How could she be delivered from her bondage?</p>

<p>The escape of a man is difficult; but what a problem was
this—the escape of a vast and cumbrous machine.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>IV</h4>

<h5>A PRELIMINARY SURVEY</h5>


<p>Gilliatt was pressed on all sides by demands upon his labours.
The most pressing, however, was to find a safe mooring for the
barge; then a shelter for himself.</p>

<p>The Durande having settled down more on the larboard than
on the starboard side, the right paddle-box was higher than
the left.</p>

<p>Gilliatt ascended the paddle-box on the right. From that
position, although the gut of rocks stretching in abrupt angles
behind the Douvres had several elbows, he was able to study
the ground-plan of the group.</p>

<p>This survey was the preliminary step of his operations.</p>

<p>The Douvres, as we have already described them, were like
two high gable-ends, forming the narrow entrance to a straggling
alley of small cliffs with perpendicular faces. It is not rare to
find in primitive submarine formations these singular kinds of
passages, which seem cut out with a hatchet.</p>

<p>This defile was extremely tortuous, and was never without
water even in the low tides. A current, much agitated,
traversed it at all times from end to end. The sharpness of
its turnings was favourable or unfavourable, according to the
nature of the prevailing wind; sometimes it broke the swell and
caused it to fall; sometimes it exasperated it. This latter
effect was the most frequent. An obstacle arouses the anger of
the sea, and pushes it to excesses. The foam is the exaggeration
of the waves.</p>

<p>The stormy winds in these narrow and tortuous passages
between the rocks are subjected to a similar compression, and
acquire the same malignant character. The tempest frets in
its sudden imprisonment. Its bulk is still immense, but
sharpened and contracted; and it strikes with the massiveness
of a huge club and the keenness of an arrow. It pierces even
while it strikes down. It is a hurricane contracted, like the
draught through the crevice of a door.</p>

<p>The two chains of rocks, leaving between them this kind
of street in the sea, formed stages at a lower level than the
Douvres, gradually decreasing, until they sunk together at a
certain distance beneath the waves.</p>

<p>There was another such gullet of less height than the gullet
of the Douvres, but narrower still, and which formed the
eastern entrance of the defile. It was evident that the double
prolongation of the ridge of rocks continued the kind of street
under the water as far as "The Man Rock," which stood like a
square citadel at the extremity of the group.</p>

<p>At low water, indeed, which was the time at which Gilliatt
was observing them, the two rows of sunken rock showed their
tips, some high and dry, and all visible and preserving their
parallel without interruption.</p>

<p>"The Man" formed the boundary, and buttressed on the
eastern side the entire mass of the group, which was protected
on the opposite side by the two Douvres.</p>

<p>The whole, from a bird's-eye view, appeared like a winding
chaplet of rocks, having the Douvres at one extremity and
"The Man" at the other.</p>

<p>The Douvres, taken together, were merely two gigantic
shafts of granite protruding vertically and almost touching
each other, and forming the crest of one of the mountainous
ranges lying beneath the ocean. Those immense ridges are not
only found rising out of the unfathomable deep. The surf and
the squall had broken them up and divided them like the teeth
of a saw. Only the tip of the ridge was visible; this was the
group of rocks. The remainder, which the waves concealed,
must have been enormous. The passage in which the storm
had planted the Durande was the way between these two
colossal shafts.</p>

<p>This passage, zigzag in form as the forked lightning, was of
about the same width in all parts. The ocean had so fashioned
it. Its eternal commotion produces sometimes those singular
regularities. There is a sort of geometry in the action of the sea.</p>

<p>From one extremity to the other of the defile, the two parallel
granite walls confronted each other at a distance which the
midship frame of the Durande measured exactly. Between the
two Douvres, the widening of the Little Douvre, curved and
turned back as it was, had formed a space for the paddles. In
any other part they must have been shattered to fragments.</p>

<p>The high double façade of rock within the passage was
hideous to the sight. When, in the exploration of the desert
of water which we call the ocean, we come upon the unknown
world of the sea, all is uncouth and shapeless. So much as
Gilliatt could see of the defile from the height of the wreck, was
appalling. In the rocky gorges of the ocean we may often
trace a strange permanent impersonation of shipwreck. The
defile of the Douvres was one of these gorges, and its effect was
exciting to the imagination. The oxydes of the rock showed
on the escarpment here and there in red places, like marks of
clotted blood; it resembled the splashes on the walls of an
abattoir. Associations of the charnel-house haunted the place.
The rough marine stones, diversely tinted—here by the decomposition
of metallic amalgams mingling with the rock, there by
the mould of dampness, manifested in places by purple scales,
hideous green blotches, and ruddy splashes, awakened ideas of
murder and extermination. It was like the unwashed walls of
a chamber which had been the scene of an assassination; or it
might have been imagined that men had been crushed to death
there, leaving traces of their fate. The peaked rocks produced
an indescribable impression of accumulated agonies. Certain
spots appeared to be still dripping with the carnage; here the
wall was wet, and it looked impossible to touch it without leaving
the fingers bloody. The blight of massacre seemed everywhere.
At the base of the double parallel escarpment, scattered
along the water's edge, or just below the waves, or in the
worn hollows of the rocks, were monstrous rounded masses of
shingle, some scarlet, others black or purple, which bore a
strange resemblance to internal organs of the body; they might
have been taken for human lungs, or heart, or liver, scattered
and putrefying in that dismal place. Giants might have been
disembowelled there. From top to bottom of the granite ran
long red lines, which might have been compared to oozings
from a funeral bier.</p>

<p>Such aspects are frequent in sea caverns.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>V</h4>

<h5>A WORD UPON THE SECRET CO-OPERATIONS OF
THE ELEMENTS</h5>


<p>Those who, by the disastrous chances of sea-voyages, happen
to be condemned to a temporary habitation upon a rock in
mid-ocean, find that the form of their inhospitable refuge is by
no means a matter of indifference. There is the pyramidal-shaped
rock, a single peak rising from the water; there is the
circle rock somewhat resembling a round of great stones; and
there is the corridor-rock. The latter is the most alarming of
all. It is not only the ceaseless agony of the waves between
its walls, or the tumult of the imprisoned sea; there are also
certain obscure meteorological characteristics which appear to
appertain to this parallelism of two marine rocks. The two
straight sides seem a veritable electric battery.</p>

<p>The first result of the peculiar position of these corridor-rocks
is an action upon the air and the water. The corridor-rock
acts upon the waves and the wind mechanically by its
form; galvanically, by the different magnetic action rendered
possible by its vertical height, its masses in juxtaposition and
contrary to each other.</p>

<p>This form of rock attracts to itself all the forces scattered in
the winds, and exercises over the tempest a singular power of
concentration.</p>

<p>Hence there is in the neighbourhood of these breakers a
certain accentuation of storms.</p>

<p>It must be borne in mind that the wind is composite. The
wind is believed to be simple; but it is by no means simple.
Its power is not merely dynamic, it is chemical also; but this
is not all, it is magnetic. Its effects are often inexplicable.
The wind is as much electrical as aerial. Certain winds coincide
with the <i>aurores boreales</i>. The wind blowing from the bank of
the Aiguilles rolls the waves one hundred feet high; a fact
observed with astonishment by Dumont-d'Urville. The corvette,
he says, "knew not what to obey."</p>

<p>In the south seas the waters will sometimes become inflated
like an outbreak of immense tumours; and at such times the
ocean becomes so terrible that the savages fly to escape the
sight of it. The blasts in the north seas are different. They
are mingled with sharp points of ice; and their gusts, unfit to
breathe, will blow the sledges of the Esquimaux backwards in
the snow. Other winds burn. The simoon of Africa is the
typhoon of China and the samiel of India. Simoon, typhoon,
and samiel, are believed to be the names of demons. They
descend from the heights of the mountains. A storm vitrified
the volcano of Toluca. This hot wind, a whirlwind of inky
colour, rushing upon red clouds, is alluded to in the Vedas:
"Behold the black god, who comes to steal the red cows." In
all these facts we trace the presence of the electric mystery.</p>

<p>The wind indeed is full of it; so are the waves. The sea, too,
is composite in its nature. Under its waves of water which we
see, it has its waves of force which are invisible. Its constituents
are innumerable. Of all the elements the ocean is the
most indivisible and the most profound.</p>

<p>Endeavour to conceive this chaos so enormous that it dwarfs
all other things to one level. It is the universal recipient,
reservoir of germs of life, and mould of transformations. It
amasses and then disperses, it accumulates and then sows, it
devours and then creates. It receives all the waste and refuse
waters of the earth, and converts them into treasure. It is
solid in the iceberg, liquid in the wave, fluid in the estuary.
Regarded as matter, it is a mass; regarded as a force, it is an
abstraction. It equalises and unites all phenomena. It may
be called the infinite in combination. By force and disturbance,
it arrives at transparency. It dissolves all differences, and
absorbs them into its own unity. Its elements are so numerous
that it becomes identity. One of its drops is complete, and
represents the whole. From the abundance of its tempests, it
attains equilibrium. Plato beheld the mazy dances of the
spheres. Strange fact, though not the less real, the ocean, in
the vast terrestrial journey round the sun, becomes, with its
flux and reflux, the balance of the globe.</p>

<p>In a phenomenon of the sea, all other phenomena are resumed.
The sea is blown out of a waterspout as from a syphon; the
storm observes the principle of the pump; the lightning issues
from the sea as from the air. Aboard ships dull shocks are
sometimes felt, and an odour of sulphur issues from the receptacles
of chain cables. The ocean boils. "The devil has
put the sea in his cauldron," said De Ruyter. In certain
tempests, which characterise the equinoxes and the return to
equilibrium of the prolific power of nature, vessels breasting the
foam seem to give out a kind of fire, phosphoric lights chase
each other along the rigging, so close sometimes to the sailors at
their work that the latter stretch forth their hands and try to
catch, as they fly, these birds of flame. After the great earthquake
of Lisbon, a blast of hot air, as from a furnace, drove
before it towards the city a wave sixty feet high. The oscillation
of the ocean is closely related to the convulsions of the earth.</p>

<p>These immeasurable forces produce sometimes extraordinary
inundations. At the end of the year 1864, one of the Maldive
Islands, at a hundred leagues from the Malabar coast, actually
foundered in the sea. It sunk to the bottom like a shipwrecked
vessel. The fishermen who sailed from it in the morning, found
nothing when they returned at night; scarcely could they
distinguish their villages under the sea. On this occasion boats
were the spectators of the wrecks of houses.</p>

<p>In Europe, where nature seems restrained by the presence of
civilisation, such events are rare and are thought impossible.
Nevertheless, Jersey and Guernsey originally formed part of
Gaul, and at the moment while we are writing these lines, an
equinoctial gale has demolished a great portion of the cliff of
the Firth of Forth in Scotland.</p>

<p>Nowhere do these terrific forces appear more formidably conjoined
than in the surprising strait known as the Lyse-Fiord.
The Lyse-Fiord is the most terrible of all the gut rocks of the
ocean. Their terrors are there complete. It is in the northern
sea, near the inhospitable Gulf of Stavanger, and in the 59th
degree of latitude. The water is black and heavy, and subject
to intermitting storms. In this sea, and in the midst of this
solitude, rises a great sombre street—a street for no human
footsteps. None ever pass through there; no ship ever ventures
in. It is a corridor ten leagues in length, between two rocky
walls of three thousand feet in height. Such is the passage which
presents an entrance to the sea. The defile has its elbows and
angles like all these streets of the sea—never straight, having
been formed by the irregular action of the water. In the Lyse-Fiord,
the sea is almost always tranquil; the sky above is
serene; the place terrible. Where is the wind? Not on high.
Where is the thunder? Not in the heavens. The wind is
under the sea; the lightnings within the rock. Now and then
there is a convulsion of the water. At certain moments, when
there is perhaps not a cloud in the sky, nearly half way up the
perpendicular rock, at a thousand or fifteen hundred feet above
the water, and rather on the southern than on the northern side,
the rock suddenly thunders, lightnings dart forth, and then
retire like those toys which lengthen out and spring back again
in the hands of children. They contract and enlarge; strike the
opposite cliff, re-enter the rock, issue forth again, recommence
their play, multiply their heads and tips of flame, grow bristling
with points, strike wherever they can, recommence again, and
then are extinguished with a sinister abruptness. Flocks of
birds fly wide in terror. Nothing is more mysterious than that
artillery issuing out of the invisible. One cliff attacks the other,
raining lightning blows from side to side. Their war concerns
not man. It signals the ancient enmity of two rocks in the
impassable gulf.</p>

<p>In the Lyse-Fiord, the wind whirls like the water in an
estuary; the rock performs the function of the clouds; and the
thunder breaks forth like volcanic fire. This strange defile is
a voltaic pile; the plates of which are the double line of cliffs.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VI</h4>

<h5>A STABLE FOR THE HORSE</h5>


<p>Gilliatt was sufficiently familiar with marine rocks to grapple
in earnest with the Douvres. Before all, as we have just said,
it was necessary to find a safe shelter for the barge.</p>

<p>The double row of reefs, which stretched in a sinuous form
behind the Douvres, connected itself here and there with other
rocks, and suggested the existence of blind passages and hollows
opening out into the straggling way, and joining again to the
principal defile like branches to a trunk.</p>

<p>The lower part of these rocks was covered with kelp, the upper
part with lichens. The uniform level of the seaweed marked
the line of the water at the height of the tide, and the limit of
the sea in calm weather. The points which the water had not
touched presented those silver and golden hues communicated
to marine granite by the white and yellow lichen.</p>

<p>A crust of conoidical shells covered the rock at certain points,
the dry rot of the granite.</p>

<p>At other points in the retreating angles, where fine sand had
accumulated, ribbed on its surface rather by the wind than by
the waves, appeared tufts of blue thistles.</p>

<p>In the indentations, sheltered from the winds, could be traced
the little perforations made by the sea-urchin. This shelly
mass of prickles, which moves about a living ball, by rolling on
its spines, and the armour of which is composed of ten thousand
pieces, artistically adjusted and welded together—the sea-urchin,
which is popularly called, for some unknown reason,
"Aristotle's lantern," wears away the granite with his five
teeth, and lodges himself in the hole. It is in such holes that
the samphire gatherers find them. They cut them in halves
and eat them raw, like an oyster. Some steep their bread in
the soft flesh. Hence its other name, "Sea-egg."</p>

<p>The tips of the further reefs, left out of the water by the
receding tide, extended close under the escarpment of "The
Man" to a sort of creek, enclosed nearly on all sides by rocky
walls. Here was evidently a possible harbourage. It had the
form of a horse-shoe, and opened only on one side to the east
wind, which is the least violent of all winds in that sea labyrinth.
The water was shut in there, and almost motionless.
The shelter seemed comparatively safe. Gilliatt, moreover,
had not much choice.</p>

<p>If he wished to take advantage of the low water, it was
important to make haste.</p>

<p>The weather continued to be fine and calm. The insolent
sea was for a while in a gentle mood.</p>

<p>Gilliatt descended, put on his shoes again, unmoored the
cable, re-embarked, and pushed out into the water. He used
the oars, coasting the side of the rock.</p>

<p>Having reached "The Man Rock," he examined the entrance
to the little creek.</p>

<p>A fixed, wavy line in the motionless sea, a sort of wrinkle, imperceptible
to any eye but that of a sailor, marked the channel.</p>

<p>Gilliatt studied for a moment its lineament, almost indistinct
under the water; then he held off a little in order to veer at ease,
and steer well into channel; and suddenly with a stroke of the
oars he entered the little bay.</p>

<p>He sounded.</p>

<p>The anchorage appeared to be excellent.</p>

<p>The sloop would be protected there against almost any of
the contingencies of the season.</p>

<p>The most formidable reefs have quiet nooks of this sort.
The ports which are thus found among the breakers are like the
hospitality of the fierce Bedouin—friendly and sure.</p>

<p>Gilliatt placed the sloop as near as he could to "The Man,"
but still far enough to escape grazing the rock; and he cast his
two anchors.</p>

<p>That done, he crossed his arms, and reflected on his position.</p>

<p>The sloop was sheltered. Here was one problem solved.
But another remained. Where could he now shelter himself?</p>

<p>He had the choice of two places: the sloop itself, with its
corner of cabin, which was scarcely habitable, and the summit
of "The Man Rock," which was not difficult to scale.</p>

<p>From one or other of these refuges it was possible at low
water, by jumping from rock to rock, to gain the passage between
the Douvres where the Durande was fixed, almost without
wetting the feet.</p>

<p>But low water lasts but a short while, and all the rest of the
time he would be cut off either from his shelter or from the
wreck by more than two hundred fathoms. Swimming among
breakers is difficult at all times; if there is the least commotion
in the sea it is impossible.</p>

<p>He was driven to give up the idea of shelter in the sloop or on
"The Man."</p>

<p>No resting-place was possible among the neighbouring rocks.</p>

<p>The summits of the lower ones disappeared twice a day
beneath the rising tide.</p>

<p>The summits of the higher ones were constantly swept by
the flakes of foam, and promised nothing but an inhospitable
drenching.</p>

<p>No choice remained but the wreck itself.</p>

<p>Was it possible to seek refuge there?</p>

<p>Gilliatt hoped it might be.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VII</h4>

<h5>A CHAMBER FOR THE VOYAGER</h5>


<p>Half-an-hour afterwards, Gilliatt having returned to the
wreck, climbed to the deck, went below, and descended into the
hold, completing the summary survey of his first visit.</p>

<p>By the help of the capstan he had raised to the deck of the
Durande the package which he had made of the lading of the
sloop. The capstan had worked well. Bars for turning it
were not wanting. Gilliatt had only to take his choice among
the heap of wreck.</p>

<p>He found among the fragments a chisel, dropped, no doubt,
from the carpenter's box, and which he added to his little
stock of tools.</p>

<p>Besides this—for in poverty of appliances so complete everything
counts for a little—he had his jack-knife in his pocket.</p>

<p>Gilliatt worked the whole day long on the wreck, clearing
away, propping, arranging.</p>

<p>At nightfall he observed the following facts:</p>

<p>The entire wreck shook in the wind. The carcass trembled
at every step he took. There was nothing stable or strong
except the portion of the hull jammed between the rocks which
contained the engine. There the beams were powerfully supported
by the granite walls.</p>

<p>Fixing his home in the Durande would be imprudent. It
would increase the weight; but far from adding to her burden,
it was important to lighten it. To burden the wreck in any
way was indeed the very contrary of what he wanted.</p>

<p>The mass of ruin required, in fact, the most careful management.
It was like a sick man at the approach of dissolution.
The wind would do sufficient to help it to its end.</p>

<p>It was, moreover, unfortunate enough to be compelled to
work there. The amount of disturbance which the wreck
would have to withstand would necessarily distress it, perhaps
beyond its strength.</p>

<p>Besides, if any accident should happen in the night while
Gilliatt was sleeping, he must necessarily perish with the vessel.
No assistance was possible; all would be over. In order to help
the shattered vessel, it was absolutely necessary to remain outside
it.</p>

<p>How to be outside and yet near it, this was the problem.</p>

<p>The difficulty became more complicated as he considered it.</p>

<p>Where could he find a shelter under such conditions?</p>

<p>Gilliatt reflected.</p>

<p>There remained nothing but the two Douvres. They seemed
hopeless enough.</p>

<p>From below, it was possible to distinguish upon the upper
plateau of the Great Douvre a sort of protuberance.</p>

<p>High rocks with flattened summits, like the Great Douvre
and "The Man," are a sort of decapitated peaks. They abound
among the mountains and in the ocean. Certain rocks, particularly
those which are met with in the open sea, bear marks like
half-felled trees. They have the appearance of having received
blows from a hatchet. They have been subjected, in fact, to
the blows of the gale, that indefatigable pioneer of the sea.</p>

<p>There are other still more profound causes of marine convulsions.
Hence the innumerable bruises upon these primeval
masses of granite. Some of these sea giants have their heads
struck off.</p>

<p>Sometimes these heads, from some inexplicable cause, do not
fall, but remain shattered on the summit of the mutilated trunk.
This singularity is by no means rare. The Devil's Rock, at
Guernsey, and the Table, in the Valley of Anweiler, illustrate
some of the most surprising features of this strange geological
enigma.</p>

<p>Some such phenomena had probably fashioned the summit of
the Great Douvre.</p>

<p>If the protuberance which could be observed on the plateau
were not a natural irregularity in the stone, it must necessarily
be some remaining fragment of the shattered summit.</p>

<p>Perhaps the fragment might contain some excavation—some
hole into which a man could creep for cover. Gilliatt asked for
no more.</p>

<p>But how could he reach the plateau? How could he scale
that perpendicular wall, hard and polished as a pebble, half
covered with the growth of glutinous confervæ, and having the
slippery look of a soapy surface?</p>

<p>The ridge of the plateau was at least thirty feet above the
deck of the Durande.</p>

<p>Gilliatt took out of his box of tools the knotted cord, hooked
it to his belt by the grapnel, and set to work to scale the Little
Douvre. The ascent became more difficult as he climbed.
He had forgotten to take off his shoes, a fact which increased
the difficulty. With great labour and straining, however, he
reached the point. Safely arrived there, he raised himself and
stood erect. There was scarcely room for his two feet. To
make it his lodging would be difficult. A Stylite might have
contented himself there; Gilliatt, more luxurious in his requirements,
wanted something more commodious.</p>

<p>The Little Douvre, leaning towards the great one, looked
from a distance as if it was saluting it, and the space between
the Douvres, which was some score of feet below, was only
eight or ten at the highest points.</p>

<p>From the spot to which he had climbed, Gilliatt saw more
distinctly the rocky excrescence which partly covered the
plateau of the Great Douvre.</p>

<p>This plateau rose three fathoms at least above his head.</p>

<p>A precipice separated him from it. The curved escarpment
of the Little Douvre sloped away out of sight beneath
him.</p>

<p>He detached the knotted rope from his belt, took a rapid
glance at the dimensions of the rock, and slung the grapnel up
to the plateau.</p>

<p>The grapnel scratched the rock, and slipped. The knotted
rope with the hooks at its end fell down beneath his feet, swinging
against the side of the little Douvre.</p>

<p>He renewed the attempt; slung the rope further, aiming at the
granite protuberance, in which he could perceive crevices and
scratches.</p>

<p>The cast was, this time, so neat and skilful, that the hooks
caught.</p>

<p>He pulled from below. A portion of the rock broke away, and
the knotted rope with its heavy iron came down once more,
striking the escarpment beneath his feet.</p>

<p>He slung the grapnel a third time.</p>

<p>It did not fall.</p>

<p>He put a strain upon the rope; it resisted. The grapnel was
firmly anchored.</p>

<p>The hooks had caught in some fracture of the plateau which
he could not see.</p>

<p>It was necessary to trust his life to that unknown support.</p>

<p>He did not hesitate.</p>

<p>The matter was urgent. He was compelled to take the
shortest route.</p>

<p>Moreover, to descend again to the deck of the Durande, in
order to devise some other step, was impossible. A slip was
probable, and a fall almost certain. It was easier to climb than
to descend.</p>

<p>Gilliatt's movements were decisive, as are those of all good
sailors. He never wasted force. He always proportioned his
efforts to the work in hand. Hence the prodigies of strength
which he executed with ordinary muscles. His biceps were
no more powerful than that of ordinary men; but his heart was
firmer. He added, in fact, to strength which is physical, energy
which belongs to the moral faculties.</p>

<p>The feat to be accomplished was appalling.</p>

<p>It was to cross the space between the two Douvres, hanging
only by this slender line.</p>

<p>Oftentimes in the path of duty and devotedness, the figure of
death rises before men to present these terrible questions:</p>

<p>Wilt thou do this? asks the shadow.</p>

<p>Gilliatt tested the cord again; the grappling-iron held firm.</p>

<p>Wrapping his left hand in his handkerchief, he grasped the
knotted cord with his right hand, which he covered with his
left; then stretching out one foot, and striking out sharply
with the other against the rock, in order that the impetus might
prevent the rope twisting, he precipitated himself from the
height of the Little Douvre on to the escarpment of the great one.</p>

<p>The shock was severe.</p>

<p>There was a rebound.</p>

<p>His clenched fists struck the rocks in their turn; the handkerchief
had loosened, and they were scratched; they had
indeed narrowly escaped being crushed.</p>

<p>Gilliatt remained hanging there a moment dizzy.</p>

<p>He was sufficiently master of himself not to let go his hold of
the cord.</p>

<p>A few moments passed in jerks and oscillations before he
could catch the cord with his feet; but he succeeded at last.</p>

<p>Recovering himself, and holding the cord at last between his
naked feet as with two hands, he gazed into the depth below.</p>

<p>He had no anxiety about the length of the cord, which had
many a time served him for great heights. The cord, in fact,
trailed upon the deck of the Durande.</p>

<p>Assured of being able to descend again, he began to climb
hand over hand, and still clinging with his feet.</p>

<p>In a few moments he had gained the summit.</p>

<p>Never before had any creature without wings found a footing
there. The plateau was covered in parts with the dung of
birds. It was an irregular trapezium, a mass struck off from
the colossal granitic prism of the Great Douvre. This block
was hollowed in the centre like a basin—a work of the rain.</p>

<p>Gilliatt, in fact, had guessed correctly.</p>

<p>At the southern angle of the block, he found a mass of superimposed
rocks, probably fragments of the fallen summit. These
rocks, looking like a heap of giant paving-stones, would have
left room for a wild beast, if one could have found its way there,
to secrete himself between them. They supported themselves
confusedly one against the other, leaving interstices like a heap
of ruins. They formed neither grottoes nor caves, but the pile
was full of holes like a sponge. One of these holes was large
enough to admit a man.</p>

<p>This recess had a flooring of moss and a few tufts of grass.
Gilliatt could fit himself in it as in a kind of sheath. The recess
at its entrance was about two feet high. It contracted towards
the bottom. Stone coffins sometimes have this form. The
mass of rocks behind lying towards the south-west, the recess
was sheltered from the showers, but was open to the cold north
wind.</p>

<p>Gilliatt was satisfied with the place.</p>

<p>The two chief problems were solved; the sloop had a harbour,
and he had found a shelter.</p>

<p>The chief merit of his cave was its accessibility from the
wreck.</p>

<p>The grappling-iron of the knotted cord having fallen between
two blocks, had become firmly hooked, but Gilliatt rendered it
more difficult to give way by rolling a huge stone upon it.</p>

<p>He was now free to operate at leisure upon the Durande.</p>

<p>Henceforth he was at home.</p>

<p>The Great Douvre was his dwelling; the Durande was his
workshop.</p>

<p>Nothing was more simple for him than going to and fro,
ascending and descending.</p>

<p>He dropped down easily by the knotted cord on to the
deck.</p>

<p>The day's work was a good one, the enterprise had begun
well; he was satisfied, and began to feel hungry.</p>

<p>He untied his basket of provisions, opened his knife, cut a
slice of smoked beef, took a bite out of his brown loaf, drank
a draught from his can of fresh water, and supped admirably.</p>

<p>To do well and eat well are two satisfactions. A full stomach
resembles an easy conscience.</p>

<p>This supper was ended, and there was still before him a little
more daylight. He took advantage of it to begin the lightening
of the wreck—an urgent necessity.</p>

<p>He had passed part of the day in gathering up the fragments.
He put on one side, in the strong compartment which contained
the machine, all that might become of use to him, such as wood,
iron, cordage, and canvas. What was useless he cast into the
sea.</p>

<p>The cargo of the sloop hoisted on to the deck by the capstan,
compact as he had made it, was an encumbrance. Gilliatt
surveyed the species of niche, at a height within his reach, in
the side of the Little Douvre. These natural closets, not shut
in, it is true, are often seen in the rocks. It struck him that
it was possible to trust some stores to this depôt, and he accordingly
placed in the back of the recess his two boxes containing
his tools and his clothing, and his two bags holding the rye-meal
and the biscuit. In the front—a little too near the edge perhaps,
but he had no other place—he rested his basket of provisions.</p>

<p>He had taken care to remove from the box of clothing his
sheepskin, his loose coat with a hood, and his waterproof
overalls.</p>

<p>To lessen the hold of the wind upon the knotted cord, he made
the lower extremity fast to one of the riders of the Durande.</p>

<p>The Durande being much driven in, this rider was bent a
good deal, and it held the end of the cord as firmly as a tight
hand.</p>

<p>There was still the difficulty of the upper end of the cord.
To control the lower part was well, but at the summit of the
escarpment at the spot where the knotted cord met the ridge of
the plateau, there was reason to fear that it would be fretted
and worn away by the sharp angle of the rock.</p>

<p>Gilliatt searched in the heap of rubbish in reserve, and took
from it some rags of sail-cloth, and from a bunch of old cables he
pulled out some strands of rope-yarn with which he filled his
pockets.</p>

<p>A sailor would have guessed that he intended to bind with
these pieces of sail-cloth and ends of yarn the part of the
knotted rope upon the edge of the rock, so as to preserve it from
all friction—an operation which is called "keckling."</p>

<p>Having provided himself with these things, he drew on his
overalls over his legs, put on his waterproof coat over his jacket,
drew its hood over his red cap, hung the sheepskin round his
neck by the two legs, and clothed in this complete panoply, he
grasped the cord, now firmly fixed to the side of the Great
Douvre, and mounted to the assault of that sombre citadel in
the sea.</p>

<p>In spite of his scratched hands, Gilliatt easily regained the
summit.</p>

<p>The last pale tints of sunset were fading in the sky. It was
night upon the sea below. A little light still lingered upon the
height of the Douvre.</p>

<p>Gilliatt took advantage of this remains of daylight to bind
the knotted rope. He wound it round again and again at the
part which passed over the edge of the rock, with a bandage of
several thicknesses of canvas strongly tied at every turn. The
whole resembled in some degree the padding which actresses
place upon their knees, to prepare them for the agonies and
supplications of the fifth act.</p>

<p>This binding completely accomplished, Gilliatt rose from his
stooping position.</p>

<p>For some moments, while he had been busied in his task,
he had had a confused sense of a singular fluttering in the
air.</p>

<p>It resembled, in the silence of the evening, the noise which an
immense bat might make with the beating of its wings.</p>

<p>Gilliatt raised his eyes.</p>

<p>A great black circle was revolving over his head in the pale
twilight sky.</p>

<p>Such circles are seen in pictures round the heads of saints.
These, however, are golden on a dark ground, while the circle
around Gilliatt was dark upon a pale ground. The effect was
strange. It spread round the Great Douvre like the aureole of
night.</p>

<p>The circle drew nearer, then retired; grew narrower, and
then spread wide again.</p>

<p>It was an immense flight of gulls, seamews, and cormorants;
a vast multitude of affrighted sea birds.</p>

<p>The Great Douvre was probably their lodging, and they were
coming to rest for the night. Gilliatt had taken a chamber in
their home. It was evident that their unexpected fellow-lodger
disturbed them.</p>

<p>A man there was an object they had never beheld before.</p>

<p>Their wild flutter continued for some time.</p>

<p>They seemed to be waiting for the stranger to leave the place.</p>

<p>Gilliatt followed them dreamily with his eyes.</p>

<p>The flying multitude seemed at last to give up their design.
The circle suddenly took a spiral form, and the cloud of sea
birds came down upon "The Man Rock" at the extremity of
the group, where they seemed to be conferring and deliberating.</p>

<p>Gilliatt, after settling down in his alcove of granite, and
covering a stone for a pillow for his head, could hear the birds
for a long time chattering one after the other, or croaking, as
if in turns.</p>

<p>Then they were silent, and all were sleeping—the birds upon
their rock, Gilliatt upon his.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VIII</h4>

<h5>IMPORTUNÆQUE VOLUCRES</h5>


<p>Gilliatt slept well; but he was cold, and this awoke him from
time to time. He had naturally placed his feet at the bottom,
and his head at the entrance to his cave. He had not taken
the precaution to remove from his couch a number of angular
stones, which did not by any means conduce to sleep.</p>

<p>Now and then he half-opened his eyes.</p>

<p>At intervals he heard loud noises. It was the rising tide
entering the caverns of the rocks with a sound like the report of
a cannon.</p>

<p>All the circumstances of his position conspired to produce
the effect of a vision. Hallucinations seemed to surround him.
The vagueness of night increased this effect; and Gilliatt felt
himself plunged into some region of unrealities. He asked
himself if all were not a dream?</p>

<p>Then he dropped to sleep again; and this time, in a veritable
dream, found himself at the Bû de la Rue, at the Bravées, at
St. Sampson. He heard Déruchette singing; he was among
realities. While he slept he seemed to wake and live; when
he awoke again he appeared to be sleeping.</p>

<p>In truth, from this time forward he lived in a dream.</p>

<p>Towards the middle of the night a confused murmur filled
the air. Gilliatt had a vague consciousness of it even in his
sleep. It was perhaps a breeze arising.</p>

<p>Once, when awakened by a cold shiver, he opened his eyes a
little wider than before. Clouds were moving in the zenith;
the moon was flying through the sky, with one large star following
closely in her footsteps.</p>

<p>Gilliatt's mind was full of the incidents of his dreams. The
wild outlines of things in the darkness were exaggerated by
this confusion with the impressions of his sleeping hours.</p>

<p>At daybreak he was half-frozen; but he slept soundly.</p>

<p>The sudden daylight aroused him from a slumber which
might have been dangerous. The alcove faced the rising sun.</p>

<p>Gilliatt yawned, stretched himself, and sprang out of his
sleeping place.</p>

<p>His sleep had been so deep that he could not at first recall
the circumstances of the night before.</p>

<p>By degrees the feeling of reality returned, and he began to
think of breakfast.</p>

<p>The weather was calm; the sky cool and serene. The clouds
were gone; the night wind had cleared the horizon, and the sun
rose brightly. Another fine day was commencing. Gilliatt felt
joyful.</p>

<p>He threw off his overcoat and his leggings; rolled them up in
the sheepskin with the wool inside, fastened the roll with a
length of rope-yarn, and pushed it into the cavern for a shelter
in case of rain.</p>

<p>This done, he made his bed—an operation which consisted
in removing the stones which had annoyed him in the night.</p>

<p>His bed made, he slid down the cord on to the deck of the
Durande, and approached the niche where he had placed his
basket of provisions. As it was very near the edge, the wind
in the night had swept it down, and rolled it into the sea.</p>

<p>It was evident that it would not be easy to recover it. There
was a spirit of mischief and malice in a wind which had sought
out his basket in that position.</p>

<p>It was the commencement of hostilities. Gilliatt understood
the token.</p>

<p>To those who live in a state of rude familiarity with the sea,
it becomes natural to regard the wind as an individuality, and
the rocks as sentient beings.</p>

<p>Nothing remained but the biscuit and the rye-meal, except
the shell-fish, on which the shipwrecked sailor had supported
a lingering existence upon "The Man Rock."</p>

<p>It was useless to think of subsisting by net or line fishing.
Fish are naturally averse to the neighbourhood of rocks. The
drag and bow net fishers would waste their labour among the
breakers, the points of which would be destructive only to their
nets.</p>

<p>Gilliatt breakfasted on a few limpets which he plucked with
difficulty from the rocks. He narrowly escaped breaking his
knife in the attempt.</p>

<p>While he was making his spare meal, he was sensible of a
strange disturbance on the sea. He looked around.</p>

<p>It was a swarm of gulls and seamews which had just alighted
upon some low rocks, and were beating their wings, tumbling
over each other, screaming, and shrieking. All were swarming
noisily upon the same point. This horde with beaks and talons
were evidently pillaging something.</p>

<p>It was Gilliatt's basket.</p>

<p>Rolled down upon a sharp point by the wind, the basket had
burst open. The birds had gathered round immediately. They
were carrying off in their beaks all sorts of fragments of provisions.
Gilliatt recognised from the distance his smoked beef
and his salted fish.</p>

<p>It was their turn now to be aggressive. The birds had taken
to reprisals. Gilliatt had robbed them of their lodging, they
deprived him of his supper.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>IX</h4>

<h5>THE ROCK, AND HOW GILLIATT USED IT</h5>


<p>A week passed.</p>

<p>Although it was in the rainy season no rain fell, a fact for
which Gilliatt felt thankful. But the work he had entered upon
surpassed, in appearance at least, the power of human hand or
skill. Success appeared so improbable that the attempt seemed
like madness.</p>

<p>It is not until a task is fairly grappled with that its difficulties
and perils become fully manifest. There is nothing like making
a commencement for making evident how difficult it will be to
come to the end. Every beginning is a struggle against resistance.
The first step is an exorable undeceiver. A difficulty
which we come to touch pricks like a thorn.</p>

<p>Gilliatt found himself immediately in the presence of obstacles.</p>

<p>In order to raise the engine of the Durande from the wreck
in which it was three-fourths buried, with any chance of success—in
order to accomplish a salvage in such a place and in such
a season, it seemed almost necessary to be a legion of men.
Gilliatt was alone; a complete apparatus of carpenters' and
engineers' tools and implements were wanted. Gilliatt had a
saw, a hatchet, a chisel, and a hammer. He wanted both a
good workshop and a good shed; Gilliatt had not a roof to cover
him. Provisions, too, were necessary, but he had not even
bread.</p>

<p>Any one who could have seen Gilliatt working on the rock
during all that first work might have been puzzled to determine
the nature of his operations. He seemed to be no longer thinking
either of the Durande or the two Douvres. He was busy
only among the breakers: he seemed absorbed in saving the
smaller parts of the shipwreck. He took advantage of every
high tide to strip the reefs of everything which the shipwreck
had distributed among them. He went from rock to rock,
picking up whatever the sea had scattered—tatters of sail-cloth,
pieces of iron, splinters of panels, shattered planking, broken
yards—here a beam, there a chain, there a pulley.</p>

<p>At the same time he carefully surveyed all the recesses of the
rocks. To his great disappointment none were habitable. He
had suffered from the cold in the night, where he lodged between
the stones on the summit of the rock, and he would gladly
have found some better refuge.</p>

<p>Two of those recesses were somewhat extensive. Although
the natural pavement of rock was almost everywhere oblique
and uneven it was possible to stand upright, and even to walk
within them. The wind and the rain wandered there at will,
but the highest tides did not reach them. They were near the
Little Douvre, and were approachable at any time. Gilliatt
decided that one should serve him as a storehouse, the other
as a forge.</p>

<p>With all the sail, rope-bands, and all the reef-earrings he
could collect, he made packages of the fragments of wreck, tying
up the wood and iron in bundles, and the canvas in parcels. He
lashed all these together carefully. As the rising tide approached
these packages, he began to drag them across the reefs to his
storehouse. In the hollow of the rocks he had found a top
rope, by means of which he had been able to haul even the large
pieces of timber. In the same manner he dragged from the sea
the numerous portions of chains which he found scattered among
the breakers.</p>

<p>Gilliatt worked at these tasks with astonishing activity and
tenacity. He accomplished whatever he attempted—nothing
could withstand his ant-like perseverance.</p>

<p>At the end of the week he had gathered into this granite
warehouse of marine stores, and ranged into order, all this miscellaneous
and shapeless mass of salvage. There was a corner
for the tacks of sails and a corner for sheets. Bow-lines were
not mixed with halliards; parrels were arranged according to
their number of holes. The coverings of rope-yarn, unwound
from the broken anchorings, were tied in bunches; the dead-eyes
without pulleys were separated from the tackle-blocks. Belaying-pins,
bullseyes, preventer-shrouds, down-hauls, snatch-blocks,
pendents, kevels, trusses, stoppers, sailbooms, if they
were not completely damaged by the storm, occupied different
compartments. All the cross-beams, timber-work, uprights,
stanchions, mast-heads, binding-strakes, portlids, and clamps,
were heaped up apart. Wherever it was possible, he had fixed
the fragments of planks, from the vessel's bottom, one in the
other. There was no confusion between reef-points and nippers
of the cable, nor of crow's-feet with towlines; nor of pulleys of
the small with pulleys of the large ropes; nor of fragments from
the waist with fragments from the stern. A place had been
reserved for a portion of the cat-harpings of the Durande, which
had supported the shrouds of the topmast and the futtock-shrouds.
Every portion had its place. The entire wreck was
there classed and ticketed. It was a sort of chaos in a storehouse.</p>

<p>A stay-sail, fixed by huge stones, served, though torn and
damaged, to protect what the rain might have injured.</p>

<p>Shattered as were the bows of the wreck, he had succeeded
in saving the two cat-heads with their three pulley-blocks.</p>

<p>He had found the bowsprit too, and had had much trouble
in unrolling its gammoning; it was very hard and tight, having
been, according to custom, made by the help of the windlass,
and in dry weather. Gilliatt, however, persevered until he
had detached it, this thick rope promising to be very useful to
him.</p>

<p>He had been equally successful in discovering the little anchor
which had become fast in the hollow of a reef, where the receding
tide had left it uncovered.</p>

<p>In what had been Tangrouille's cabin he had found a piece
of chalk, which he preserved carefully. He reflected that he
might have some marks to make.</p>

<p>A fire-bucket and several pails in pretty good condition completed
this stock of working materials.</p>

<p>All that remained of the store of coal of the Durande he carried
into the warehouse.</p>

<p>In a week this salvage of débris was finished; the rock was
swept clean, and the Durande was lightened. Nothing remained
now to burden the hull except the machinery.</p>

<p>The portion of the fore-side bulwarks which hung to it did
not distress the hull. The mass hung without dragging, being
partly sustained by a ledge of rock. It was, however, large and
broad, and heavy to drag, and would have encumbered his
warehouse too much. This bulwarking looked something like a
boat-builder's stocks. Gilliatt left it where it was.</p>

<p>He had been profoundly thoughtful during all this labour.
He had sought in vain for the figure-head—the "doll," as the
Guernsey folks called it, of the Durande. It was one of the
things which the waves had carried away for ever. Gilliatt
would have given his hands to find it—if he had not had such
peculiar need of them at that time.</p>

<p>At the entrance to the storehouse and outside were two heaps
of refuse—a heap of iron good for forging, and a heap of wood
good for burning.</p>

<p>Gilliatt was always at work at early dawn. Except his time
of sleep, he did not take a moment of repose.</p>

<p>The wild sea birds, flying hither and thither, watched him at
his work.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>X</h4>

<h5>THE FORGE</h5>


<p>The warehouse completed, Gilliatt constructed his forge.</p>

<p>The other recess which he had chosen had within it a species
of passage like a gallery in a mine of pretty good depth. He
had had at first an idea of making this his lodging, but the
draught was so continuous and so persevering in this passage
that he had been compelled to give it up. This current of air,
incessantly renewed, first gave him the notion of the forge.
Since it could not be his chamber, he was determined that this
cabin should be his smithy. To bend obstacles to our purposes
is a great step towards triumph. The wind was Gilliatt's
enemy. He had set about making it his servant.</p>

<p>The proverb applied to certain kinds of men—"Fit for everything,
good for nothing"—may also be applied to the hollows
of rocks. They give no advantages gratuitously. On one side
we find a hollow fashioned conveniently in the shape of a bath;
but it allows the water to run away through a fissure. Here is
a rocky chamber, but without a roof; here a bed of moss, but
oozy with wet; here an arm-chair, but one of hard stone.</p>

<p>The forge which Gilliatt intended was roughly sketched out
by nature; but nothing could be more troublesome than to
reduce this rough sketch to manageable shape, to transform
this cavern into a laboratory and smith's shop. With three or
four large rocks, shaped like a funnel, and ending in a narrow
fissure, chance had constructed there a species of vast ill-shapen
blower, of very different power to those huge old forge bellows
of fourteen feet long, which poured out at every breath ninety-eight
thousand inches of air. This was quite a different sort
of construction. The proportions of the hurricane cannot be
definitely measured.</p>

<p>This excess of force was an embarrassment. The incessant
draught was difficult to regulate.</p>

<p>The cavern had two inconveniences; the wind traversed it
from end to end; so did the water.</p>

<p>This was not the water of the sea, but a continual little
trickling stream, more like a spring than a torrent.</p>

<p>The foam, cast incessantly by the surf upon the rocks and
sometimes more than a hundred feet in the air, had filled with
sea water a natural cave situated among the high rocks overlooking
the excavation. The overflowings of this reservoir
caused, a little behind the escarpment, a fall of water of about
an inch in breadth, and descending four or five fathoms. An
occasional contribution from the rains also helped to fill the
reservoir. From time to time a passing cloud dropped a shower
into the rocky basin, always overflowing. The water was
brackish, and unfit to drink, but clear. This rill of water fell
in graceful drops from the extremities of the long marine
grasses, as from the ends of a length of hair.</p>

<p>He was struck with the idea of making this water serve to
regulate the draught in the cave. By the means of a funnel
made of planks roughly and hastily put together to form two
or three pipes, one of which was fitted with a valve, and of
a large tub arranged as a lower reservoir, without checks or
counterweight, and completed solely by air-tight stuffing above
and air-holes below, Gilliatt, who, as we have already said, was
handy at the forge and at the mechanic's bench, succeeded in
constructing, instead of the forge-bellows, which he did not
possess, an apparatus less perfect than what is known now-a-days
by the name of a "cagniardelle," but less rude than what
the people of the Pyrenees anciently called a "trompe."</p>

<p>He had some rye-meal, and he manufactured with it some
paste. He had also some white rope, which picked out into tow.
With this paste and tow, and some bits of wood, he stopped all
the crevices of the rock, leaving only a little air passage made
of a powder-flask which he had found aboard the Durande, and
which had served for loading the signal gun. This powder-flask
was directed horizontally to a large stone, which Gilliatt
made the hearth of the forge. A stopper made of a piece of
tow served to close it in case of need.</p>

<p>After this, he heaped up the wood and coal upon the hearth,
struck his steel against the bare rock, caught a spark upon a
handful of loose tow, and having ignited it, soon lighted his
forge fire.</p>

<p>He tried the blower: it worked well.</p>

<p>Gilliatt felt the pride of a Cyclops: he was the master of air,
water, and fire. Master of the air; for he had given a kind of lungs
to the wind, and changed the rude draught into a useful blower.
Master of water, for he had converted the little cascade into a
"trompe." Master of fire, for out of this moist rock he had
struck a flame.</p>

<p>The cave being almost everywhere open to the sky, the smoke
issued freely, blackening the curved escarpment. The rocks
which seemed destined for ever to receive only the white foam,
became now familiar with the blackening smoke.</p>

<p>Gilliatt selected for an anvil a large smooth round stone, of
about the required shape and dimensions. It formed a base
for the blows of his hammer; but one that might fly and was
very dangerous. One of the extremities of this block, rounded
and ending in a point, might, for want of anything better, serve
instead of a conoid bicorn; but the other kind of bicorn of
the pyramidal form was wanting. It was the ancient stone
anvil of the Troglodytes. The surface, polished by the waves,
had almost the firmness of steel.</p>

<p>He regretted not having brought his anvil. As he did not
know that the Durande had been broken in two by the tempest,
he had hoped to find the carpenter's chest and all his tools
generally kept in the forehold. But it was precisely the fore-part
of the vessel which had been carried away.</p>

<p>These two excavations which he had found in the rock were
contiguous. The warehouse and the forge communicated with
each other.</p>

<p>Every evening, when his work was ended, he supped on a
little biscuit, moistened in water, a sea-urchin or a crab, or a
few <i>châtaignes de mer</i>, the only food to be found among those
rocks; and shivering like his knotted cord, mounted again to
sleep in his cell upon the Great Douvre.</p>

<p>The very materialism of his daily occupation increased the
kind of abstraction in which he lived. To be steeped too deeply
in realities is in itself a cause of visionary moods. His bodily
labour, with its infinite variety of details, detracted nothing
from the sensation of stupor which arose from the strangeness of
his position and his work. Ordinary bodily fatigue is a thread
which binds man to the earth; but the very peculiarity of the
enterprise he was engaged in kept him in a sort of ideal twilight
region. There were times when he seemed to be striking blows
with his hammer in the clouds. At other moments his tools
appeared to him like arms. He had a singular feeling, as if
he was repressing or providing against some latent danger of
attack. Untwisting ropes, unravelling threads of yarn in a
sail, or propping up a couple of beams, appeared to him at such
times like fashioning engines of war. The thousand minute
pains which he took about his salvage operations produced at
last in his mind the effect of precautions against aggressions
little concealed, and easy to anticipate. He did not know the
words which express the ideas, but he perceived them. His
instincts became less and less those of the worker; his habits
more and more those of the savage man.</p>

<p>His business there was to subdue and direct the powers of
nature. He had an indistinct perception of it. A strange
enlargement of his ideas!</p>

<p>Around him, far as eye could reach, was the vast prospect of
endless labour wasted and lost. Nothing is more disturbing to
the mind than the contemplation of the diffusion of forces at
work in the unfathomable and illimitable space of the ocean.
The mind tends naturally to seek the object of these forces.
The unceasing movement in space, the unwearying sea, the
clouds that seem ever hurrying somewhere, the vast mysterious
prodigality of effort, all this is a problem. Whither does this
perpetual movement tend? What do these winds construct?
What do these giant blows build up? These howlings, shocks,
and sobbings of the storm, what do they end in? and what is
the business of this tumult? The ebb and flow of these
questionings is eternal, as the flux and reflux of the sea itself.
Gilliatt could answer for himself; his work he knew, but the
agitation which surrounded him far and wide at all times perplexed
him confusedly with its eternal questionings. Unknown
to himself, mechanically, by the mere pressure of external things,
and without any other effect than a strange, unconscious bewilderment,
Gilliatt, in this dreamy mood, blended his own toil
somehow with the prodigious wasted labour of the sea-waves.
How, indeed, in that position, could he escape the influence of
that mystery of the dread, laborious ocean? how do other than
meditate, so far as meditation was possible, upon the vacillation
of the waves, the perseverance of the foam, the imperceptible
wearing down of rocks, the furious beatings of the four winds?
How terrible that perpetual recommencement, that ocean bed,
those Danaïdes-like clouds, all that travail and weariness for
no end!</p>

<p>For no end? Not so! But for what? O Thou Infinite
Unknown, Thou only knowest!</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>XI</h4>

<h5>DISCOVERY</h5>


<p>A rock near the coast is sometimes visited by men; a rock
in mid-ocean never. What object could any one have there?
No supplies can be drawn thence; no fruit-trees are there, no
pasturage, no beasts, no springs of water fitted for man's use.
It stands aloft, a rock with its steep sides and summits above
water, and its sharp points below. Nothing is to be found
there but inevitable shipwreck.</p>

<p>This kind of rocks, which in the old sea dialect were called
<i>Isolés</i>, are, as we have said, strange places. The sea is alone
there; she works her own will. No token of terrestrial life
disturbs her. Man is a terror to the sea; she is shy of his
approach, and hides from him her deeds. But she is bolder
among the lone sea rocks. The everlasting soliloquy of the
waves is not troubled there. She labours at the rock, repairs
its damage, sharpens its peaks, makes them rugged or renews
them. She pierces the granite, wears down the soft stone, and
denudes the hard; she rummages, dismembers, bores, perforates,
and grooves; she fills the rock with cells, and makes it sponge-like,
hollows out the inside, or sculptures it without. In that
secret mountain which is hers, she makes to herself caves,
sanctuaries, palaces. She has her splendid and monstrous
vegetation, composed of floating plants which bite, and of
monsters which take root; and she hides away all this terrible
magnificence in the twilight of her deeps. Among the isolated
rocks no eye watches over her; no spy embarrasses her movements.
It is there that she develops at liberty her mysterious
side, which is inaccessible to man. Here she keeps all strange
secretions of life. Here that the unknown wonders of the sea
are assembled.</p>

<p>Promontories, forelands, capes, headlands, breakers, and
shoals are veritable constructions. The geological changes of
the earth are trifling compared with the vast operations of the
ocean. These breakers, these habitations in the sea, these
pyramids, and spouts of the foam are the practicers of a
mysterious art which the author of this book has somewhere
called "the Art of Nature." Their style is known by its vastness.
The effects of chance seem here design. Its works are
multiform. They abound in the mazy entanglement of the
rock-coral groves, the sublimity of the cathedral, the extravagance
of the pagoda, the amplitude of the mountain, the
delicacy of the jeweller's work, the horror of the sepulchre.
They are filled with cells like the wasps' nest, with dens like
menageries, with subterranean passages like the haunts of moles,
with dungeons like Bastiles, with ambuscades like a camp.
They have their doors, but they are barricaded; their columns,
but they are shattered; their towers, but they are tottering;
their bridges, but they are broken. Their compartments are
unaccommodating; these are fitted for the birds only, those
only for fish. They are impassable. Their architectural style
is variable and inconsistent; it regards or disregards at will the
laws of equilibrium, breaks off, stops short, begins in the form
of an archivolt, and ends in an architrave, block on block.
Enceladus is the mason. A wondrous science of dynamics
exhibits here its problems ready solved. Fearful overhanging
blocks threaten, but fall not: the human mind cannot guess
what power supports their bewildering masses. Blind entrances,
gaps, and ponderous suspensions multiply and vary
infinitely. The laws which regulate this Babel baffle human
induction. The great unknown architect plans nothing, but
succeeds in all. Rocks massed together in confusion form a
monstrous monument, defy reason, yet maintain equilibrium.
Here is something more than strength; it is eternity. But
order is wanting. The wild tumult of the waves seems to have
passed into the wilderness of stone. It is like a tempest petrified
and fixed for ever. Nothing is more impressive than that wild
architecture; always standing, yet always seeming to fall; in
which everything appears to give support, and yet to withdraw
it. A struggle between opposing lines has resulted in the construction
of an edifice, filled with traces of the efforts of those
old antagonists, the ocean and the storm.</p>

<p>This architecture has its terrible masterpieces, of which the
Douvres rock was one.</p>

<p>The sea had fashioned and perfected it with a sinister solicitude.
The snarling waters licked it into shape. It was hideous,
treacherous, dark, full of hollows.</p>

<p>It had a complete system of submarine caverns ramifying and
losing themselves in unfathomed depths. Some of the orifices
of this labyrinth of passages were left exposed by the low tides.
A man might enter there, but at his risk and peril.</p>

<p>Gilliatt determined to explore all these grottoes, for the
purpose of his salvage labour. There was not one which was
not repulsive. Everywhere about the caverns that strange
aspect of an abattoir, those singular traces of slaughter, appeared
again in all the exaggeration of the ocean. No one who
has not seen in excavations of this kind, upon the walls of everlasting
granite, these hideous natural frescoes, can form a
notion of their singularity.</p>

<p>These pitiless caverns, too, were false and sly. Woe betide
him who would loiter there. The rising tide filled them to
their roofs.</p>

<p>Rock limpets and edible mosses abounded among them.</p>

<p>They were obstructed by quantities of shingle, heaped
together in their recesses. Some of their huge smooth stones
weighed more than a ton. They were of every proportion, and
of every hue; but the greater part were blood coloured. Some,
covered with a hairy and glutinous seaweed, seemed like large
green moles boring a way into the rock.</p>

<p>Several of the caverns terminated abruptly in the form of a
demi-cupola. Others, main arteries of a mysterious circulation,
lengthened out in the rock in dark and tortuous fissures.
They were the alleys of the submarine city; but they gradually
contracted from their entrances, and at length left no way for
a man to pass. Peering in by the help of a lighted torch, he
could see nothing but dark hollows dripping with moisture.</p>

<p>One day, Gilliatt, exploring, ventured into one of these
fissures. The state of the tide favoured the attempt. It was
a beautiful day of calm and sunshine. There was no fear of
any accident from the sea to increase the danger.</p>

<p>Two necessities, as we have said, compelled him to undertake
these explorations. He had to gather fragments of wreck and
other things to aid him in his labour, and to search for crabs
and crayfish for his food. Shell-fish had begun to fail him on
the rocks.</p>

<p>The fissure was narrow, and the passage difficult. Gilliatt
could see daylight beyond. He made an effort, contorted
himself as much as he could, and penetrated into the cave as
far as he was able.</p>

<p>He had reached, without suspecting it, the interior of the
rock, upon the point of which Clubin had steered the Durande.
Though abrupt and almost inaccessible without, it was hollowed
within. It was full of galleries, pits, and chambers, like the
tomb of an Egyptian king. This network of caverns was one
of the most complicated of all that labyrinth, a labour of the
water, the undermining of the restless sea. The branches of
the subterranean maze probably communicated with the sea
without by more than one issue, some gaping at the level of the
waves, the others profound and invisible. It was near here,
but Gilliatt knew it not, that Clubin had dived into the sea.</p>

<p>In this crocodile cave—where crocodiles, it is true, were not
among the dangers—Gilliatt wound about, clambered, struck
his head occasionally, bent low and rose again, lost his footing
and regained it many times, advancing laboriously. By
degrees the gallery widened; a glimmer of daylight appeared,
and he found himself suddenly at the entrance to a cavern of a
singular kind.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>XII</h4>

<h5>THE INTERIOR OF AN EDIFICE UNDER THE SEA</h5>


<p>The gleam of daylight was fortunate.</p>

<p>One step further, and Gilliatt must have fallen into a pool,
perhaps without bottom. The waters of these cavern pools
are so cold and paralysing as to prove fatal to the strongest
swimmers.</p>

<p>There is, moreover, no means of remounting or of hanging on
to any part of their steep walls.</p>

<p>He stopped short. The crevice from which he had just
issued ended in a narrow and slippery projection, a species of
corbel in the peaked wall. He leaned against the side and
surveyed it.</p>

<p>He was in a large cave. Over his head was a roofing not
unlike the inside of a vast skull, which might have been imagined
to have been recently dissected. The dripping ribs of the
striated indentations of the roof seemed to imitate the branching
fibres and jagged sutures of the bony cranium. A stony
ceiling and a watery floor. The rippled waters between the
four walls of the cave were like wavy paving tiles. The grotto
was shut in on all sides. Not a window, not even an air-hole
visible. No breach in the wall, no crack in the roof. The
light came from below and through the water, a strange,
sombre light.</p>

<p>Gilliatt, the pupils of whose eyes had contracted during his
explorations of the dusky corridor, could distinguish everything
about him in the pale glimmer.</p>

<p>He was familiar, from having often visited them, with the
caves of Plémont in Jersey, the Creux-Maillé at Guernsey, the
Boutiques at Sark; but none of these marvellous caverns could
compare with the subterranean and submarine chamber into
which he had made his way.</p>

<p>Under the water at his feet he could see a sort of drowned
arch. This arch, a natural ogive, fashioned by the waves, was
glittering between its two dark and profound supports. It was
by this submerged porch that the daylight entered into the
cavern from the open sea. A strange light shooting upward
from a gulf.</p>

<p>The glimmer spread out beneath the waters like a large fan,
and was reflected on the rocks. Its direct rays, divided into
long, broad shafts, appeared in strong relief against the darkness
below, and becoming brighter or more dull from one rock
to another, looked as if seen here and there through plates of
glass. There was light in that cave it is true; but it was the
light that was unearthly. The beholder might have dreamed
that he had descended in some other planet. The glimmer
was an enigma, like the glaucous light from the eye-pupil of a
Sphinx. The whole cave represented the interior of a death's-head
of enormous proportions, and of a strange splendour. The
vault was the hollow of the brain, the arch the mouth; the
sockets of the eyes were wanting. The cavern, alternately
swallowing and rendering up the flux and reflux through its
mouth wide opened to the full noonday without, seemed to
drink in the light and vomit forth bitterness; a type of some
beings intelligent and evil. The light, in traversing this inlet
through the vitreous medium of the sea-water, became green,
like a ray of starlight from Aldebaran. The water, filled with
the moist light, appeared like a liquid emerald. A tint of
aqua-marina of marvellous delicacy spread a soft hue throughout
the cavern. The roof, with its cerebral lobes, and its
rampant ramifications, like the fibres of nerves, gave out a
tender reflection of chrysoprase. The ripples reflected on the
roof were falling in order and dissolving again incessantly, and
enlarging and contracting their glittering scales in a mysterious
and mazy dance. They gave the beholder an impression of
something weird and spectral: he wondered what prey secured,
or what expectation about to be realised, moved with a joyous
thrill this magnificent network of living fire. From the projections
of the vault, and the angles of the rock, hung lengths of
delicate fibrous plants, bathing their roots probably through
the granite in some upper pool of water, and distilling from
their silky ends one after the other, a drop of water like a pearl.
These drops fell in the water now and then with a gentle splash.
The effect of the scene was singular. Nothing more beautiful
could be imagined; nothing more mournful could anywhere be
found.</p>

<p>It was a wondrous palace, in which death sat smiling and
content.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>XIII</h4>

<h5>WHAT WAS SEEN THERE; AND WHAT PERCEIVED DIMLY</h5>


<p>A place of shade, which yet was dazzling to the eyes—such was
this surprising cavern.</p>

<p>The beating of the sea made itself felt throughout the cavern.
The oscillation without raised and depressed the level of the
waters within, with the regularity of respiration. A mysterious
spirit seemed to fill this great organism, as it swelled and subsided
in silence.</p>

<p>The water had a magical transparency, and Gilliatt distinguished
at various depths submerged recesses, and surfaces of
jutting rocks ever of a deeper and a deeper green. Certain dark
hollows, too, were there, probably too deep for soundings.</p>

<p>On each side of the submarine porch, rude elliptical arches,
filled with shallows, indicated the position of small lateral
caves, low alcoves of the central cavern, accessible, perhaps, at
certain tides. These openings had roofs in the form of inclined
planes, and at angles more or less acute. Little sandy beaches
of a few feet wide, laid bare by the action of the water, stretched
inward, and were lost in these recesses.</p>

<p>Here and there seaweeds of more than a fathom in length
undulated beneath the water, like the waving of long tresses in
the wind; and there were glimpses of a forest of sea plants.</p>

<p>Above and below the surface of the water, the wall of the
cavern from top to bottom—from the vault down to the depth
at which it became invisible—was tapestried with that prodigious
efflorescence of the sea, rarely perceived by human eyes,
which the old Spanish navigators called <i>praderias del mar</i>. A
luxuriant moss, having all the tints of the olive, enlarged and
concealed the protuberances of granite. From all the jutting
points swung the thin fluted strips of varech, which sailors
use as their barometers. The light breath which stirred in the
cavern waved to and fro their glossy bands.</p>

<p>Under these vegetations there showed themselves from time
to time some of the rarest <i>bijoux</i> of the casket of the ocean;
ivory shells, strombi, purple-fish, univalves, struthiolaires,
turriculated cerites. The bell-shaped limpet shells, like tiny
huts, were everywhere adhering to the rocks, distributed in
settlements, in the alleys between which prowled oscabrions,
those beetles of the sea. A few large pebbles found their way
into the cavern; shell-fish took refuge there. The crustacea
are the grandees of the sea, who, in their lacework and embroidery,
avoid the rude contact of the pebbly crowd. The glittering
heap of their shells, in certain spots under the wave, gave out
singular irradiations, amidst which the eye caught glimpses of
confused azure and gold, and mother-of-pearl, of every tint of
the water.</p>

<p>Upon the side of the cavern, a little above the water-line, a
magnificent and singular plant, attaching itself, like a fringe,
to the border of seaweed, continued and completed it. This
plant, thick, fibrous, inextricably intertwined, and almost
black, exhibited to the eye large confused and dusky festoons,
everywhere dotted with innumerable little flowers of the colour
of lapis-lazuli. In the water they seemed to glow like small
blue flames. Out of the water they were flowers; beneath it
they were sapphires. The water rising and inundating the
basement of the grotto clothed with these plants, seemed to cover
the rock with gems.</p>

<p>At every swelling of the wave these flowers increased in
splendour, and at every subsidence grew dull again. So it is
with the destiny of man; aspiration is life, the outbreathing
of the spirit is death.</p>

<p>One of the marvels of the cavern was the rock itself. Forming
here a wall, there an arch, and here again a pillar or pilaster,
it was in places rough and bare, and sometimes close beside,
was wrought with the most delicate natural carving. Strange
evidences of mind mingled with the massive stolidity of the
granite. It was the wondrous art-work of the ocean. Here a
sort of panel, cut square, and covered with round embossments
in various positions, simulated a vague bas-relief. Before this
sculpture, with its obscure designs, a man might have dreamed
of Prometheus roughly sketching for Michael Angelo. It seemed
as if that great genius with a few blows of his mallet could have
finished the indistinct labours of the giant. In other places the
rock was damasked like a Saracen buckler, or engraved like
a Florentine vase. There were portions which appeared like
Corinthian brass, then like arabesques, as on the door of a
mosque; then like Runic stones with obscure and mystic prints
of claws. Plants with twisted creepers and tendrils, crossing
and recrossing upon the groundwork of golden lichens, covered
it with filigree. The grotto resembled in some wise a Moorish
palace. It was a union of barbarism and of goldsmith's
work, with the imposing and rugged architecture of the
elements.</p>

<p>The magnificent stains and moulderings of the sea covered,
as with velvet, the angles of granite. The escarpments were
festooned with large-flowered bindweed, sustaining itself with
graceful ease, and ornamenting the walls as by intelligent design.
Wall-pellitories showed their strange clusters in tasteful arrangement.
The wondrous light which came from beneath the water,
at once a submarine twilight and an Elysian radiance, softened
down and blended all harsh lineaments. Every wave was a
prism. The outlines of things under these rainbow-tinted
undulations produced the chromatic effects of optical glasses
made too convex. Solar spectra shot through the waters.
Fragments of rainbows seemed floating in that transparent
dawn. Elsewhere—in other corners—there was discernible a
kind of moonlight in the water. Every kind of splendour
seemed to mingle there, forming a strange sort of twilight.
Nothing could be more perplexing or enigmatical than the
sumptuous beauties of this cavern. Enchantment reigned over
all. The fantastic vegetation, the rude masonry of the place
seemed to harmonise. It was a happy marriage this, between
these strange wild things. The branches seeming but to touch
one another clung closely each to each. The stern rock and the
pale flower met in a passionate embrace. Massive pillars had
capitals and entwining wreaths of delicate garlands, that
quivered through every fibre, suggestive of fairy fingers tickling
the feet of a Behemoth, and the rock upheld the plant, and the
plant clasped the rock with unnatural joy of attraction.</p>

<p>The effect produced by the mysterious reconciliation of these
strange forms was of a supreme and inexpressible beauty.</p>

<p>The works of nature, not less than the works of genius, contain
the absolute, and produce an impression of awe. Something
unexpected about them imperiously insists on our mental
submission; we are conscious of a premeditation beyond our
human scope, and at no time are they more startling than when
we suddenly become aware of the beauty that is mingled with
their terror.</p>

<p>This hidden grotto was, if we may use the expression,
siderealised. There was everything in it to surprise and overwhelm.
An apocalyptic light illuminated this crypt. One
could not tell if that which the eyes looked upon was a reality,
for reality bore the impress of the impossible. One could see,
and touch, and know that one was standing there, and yet it
was difficult to believe in it all.</p>

<p>Was it daylight which entered by this casement beneath the
sea? Was it indeed water which trembled in this dusky pool?
Were not these arched roofs and porches fashioned out of sunset
clouds to imitate a cavern to men's eyes? What stone was that
beneath the feet? Was not this solid shaft about to melt
and pass into thin air? What was that cunning jewellery of
glittering shells, half seen beneath the wave? How far away
were life, and the green earth, and human faces? What strange
enchantment haunted that mystic twilight? What blind
emotion, mingling its sympathies with the uneasy restlessness
of plants beneath the wave?</p>

<p>At the extremity of the cavern, which was oblong, rose a
Cyclopean archivolte, singularly exact in form. It was a species
of cave within a cave, of tabernacle within a sanctuary. Here,
behind a sheet of bright verdure, interposed like the veil of a
temple, arose a stone out of the waves, having square sides,
and bearing some resemblance to an altar. The water surrounded
it in all parts. It seemed as if a goddess had just
descended from it. One might have dreamed there that some
celestial form beneath that crypt or upon that altar dwelt for
ever pensive in naked beauty, but grew invisible at the approach
of mortals. It was hard to conceive that majestic chamber
without a vision within. The day-dream of the intruder might
evoke again the marvellous apparition. A flood of chaste light
falling upon white shoulders scarcely seen; a forehead bathed
with the light of dawn; an Olympian visage oval-shaped; a
bust full of mysterious grace; arms modestly drooping; tresses
unloosened in the aurora; a body delicately modelled of pure
whiteness, half-wrapped in a sacred cloud, with the glance of a
virgin; a Venus rising from the sea, or Eve issuing from chaos;
such was the dream which filled the mind.</p>

<p>It seemed improbable that no phantom figure haunted this
abode. Some woman's form, the embodiment of a star, had
no doubt but shortly left the altar. Enveloped in this atmosphere
of mute adoration the mind pictured an Amphitryon, a
Tethys, some Diana capable of passion, some idealistic figure
formed of light, looking softly down in the surrounding
dusk. It was she who had left behind in the cave this perfumed
luminosity, an emanation from her star-body. The
dazzling phantom was no longer visible, she was only revealed
by the invisible, and the sense of her presence lingered, setting
the whole being voluptuously a-quiver. The goddess had
departed, but divinity remained.</p>

<p>The beauty of the recess seemed made for this celestial
presence. It was for the sake of this deity, this fairy of the
pearl caverns, this queen of the Zephyrs, this Grace born of
the waves, it was for her—as the mind, at least, imagined—that
this subterranean dwelling had been thus religiously walled in,
so that nothing might ever trouble the reverent shadows and
the majestic silence round about that divine spirit.</p>

<p>Gilliatt, who was a kind of seer amid the secrets of nature,
stood there musing, and sensible of confused emotions.</p>

<p>Suddenly, at a few feet below him, in the delightful transparence
of that water like liquid jewels, he became sensible of
the approach of something of mystic shape. A species of long
ragged band was moving amidst the oscillation of the waves.
It did not float, but darted about of its own will. It had an
object; was advancing somewhere rapidly. The object had
something of the form of a jester's bauble with points, which
hung flabby and undulating. It seemed covered with a dust
incapable of being washed away by the water. It was more
than horrible; it was foul. The beholder felt that it was something
monstrous. It was a living thing; unless, indeed, it were
but an illusion. It seemed to be seeking the darker portion of
the cavern, where at last it vanished. The heavy shadows grew
darker as its sinister form glided into them, and disappeared.</p>



