<h4>I</h4>

<h5>PRATTLE AND SMOKE</h5>


<p>The human body might well be regarded as a mere simulacrum;
but it envelopes our reality, it darkens our light, and broadens
the shadow in which we live. The soul is the reality of our
existence. Strictly speaking, the human visage is a mask. The
true man is that which exists under what is called man. If that
being, which thus exists sheltered and secreted behind that
illusion which we call the flesh, could be approached, more than
one strange revelation would be made. The vulgar error is to
mistake the outward husk for the living spirit. Yonder maiden,
for example, if we could see her as she really is, might she not
figure as some bird of the air?</p>

<p>A bird transmuted into a young maiden, what could be more
exquisite? Picture it in your own home, and call it Déruchette.
Delicious creature! One might be almost tempted to say,
"Good-morning, Mademoiselle Goldfinch." The wings are
invisible, but the chirping may still be heard. Sometimes, too,
she pipes a clear, loud song. In her childlike prattle, the
creature is, perhaps, inferior; but in her song, how superior to
humanity! When womanhood dawns, this angel flies away;
but sometimes returns, bringing back a little one to a mother.
Meanwhile, she who is one day to be a mother is for a long while
a child; the girl becomes a maiden, fresh and joyous as the lark.
Noting her movements, we feel as if it was good of her not to fly
away. The dear familiar companion moves at her own sweet
will about the house; flits from branch to branch, or rather from
room to room; goes to and fro; approaches and retires; plumes
her wings, or rather combs her hair, and makes all kinds of
gentle noises—murmurings of unspeakable delight to certain
ears. She asks a question, and is answered; is asked something
in return, and chirps a reply. It is delightful to chat with her
when tired of serious talk; for this creature carries with her
something of her skyey element. She is, as it were, a thread of
gold interwoven with your sombre thoughts; you feel almost
grateful to her for her kindness in not making herself invisible,
when it would be so easy for her to be even impalpable; for the
beautiful is a necessary of life. There is, in this world, no
function more important than that of being charming. The
forest-glade would be incomplete without the humming-bird.
To shed joy around, to radiate happiness, to cast light upon
dark days, to be the golden thread of our destiny, and the very
spirit of grace and harmony, is not this to render a service?
Does not beauty confer a benefit upon us, even by the simple fact
of being beautiful? Here and there we meet with one who possesses
that fairy-like power of enchanting all about her; sometimes
she is ignorant herself of this magical influence, which is,
however, for that reason, only the more perfect. Her presence
lights up the home; her approach is like a cheerful warmth; she
passes by; and we are content; she stays awhile, and we are
happy. To behold her is to live: she is the Aurora with a
human face. She has no need to do more than simply to be:
she makes an Eden of the house; Paradise breathes from her;
and she communicates this delight to all, without taking any
greater trouble than that of existing beside them. Is it not a
thing divine to have a smile which, none know how, has the
power to lighten the weight of that enormous chain which all
the living, in common, drag behind them? Déruchette possessed
this smile: we may even say that this smile was Déruchette
herself. There is one thing which has more resemblance
to ourselves than even our face, and that is our expression:
but there is yet another thing which more resembles us than
this, and that is our smile. Déruchette smiling was simply
Déruchette.</p>

<p>There is something peculiarly attractive in the Jersey and
Guernsey race. The women, particularly the young, are remarkable
for a pure and exquisite beauty. Their complexion
is a combination of the Saxon fairness, with the proverbial
ruddiness of the Norman people—rosy cheeks and blue eyes;
but the eyes want brilliancy. The English training dulls them.
Their liquid glances will be irresistible whenever the secret is
found of giving them that depth which is the glory of the
Parisienne. Happily Englishwomen are not yet quite transformed
into the Parisian type. Déruchette was not a Parisian;
yet she was certainly not a Guernesiaise. Lethierry had
brought her up to be neat and delicate and pretty; and so she
was.</p>

<p>Déruchette had, at times, an air of bewitching langour, and
a certain mischief in the eye, which were altogether involuntary.
She scarcely knew, perhaps, the meaning of the word love, and
yet not unwillingly ensnared those about her in the toils. But
all this in her was innocent. She never thought of marrying.</p>

<p>Déruchette had the prettiest little hands in the world, and
little feet to match them. Sweetness and goodness reigned
throughout her person; her family and fortune were her uncle
Mess Lethierry; her occupation was only to live her daily life;
her accomplishments were the knowledge of a few songs; her
intellectual gifts were summed up in her simple innocence; she
had the graceful repose of the West Indian woman, mingled at
times with giddiness and vivacity, with the teasing playfulness
of a child, yet with a dash of melancholy. Her dress was somewhat
rustic, and like that peculiar to her country—elegant,
though not in accordance with the fashions of great cities; for
she wore flowers in her bonnet all the year round. Add to all
this an open brow, a neck supple and graceful, chestnut hair, a
fair skin slightly freckled with exposure to the sun, a mouth
somewhat large, but well-defined, and visited from time to
time by a dangerous smile. This was Déruchette.</p>

<p>Sometimes in the evening, a little after sunset, at the moment
when the dusk of the sky mingles with the dusk of the sea, and
twilight invests the waves with a mysterious awe, the people
beheld, entering the harbour of St. Sampson, upon the dark
rolling waters, a strange, undefined thing, a monstrous form
which puffed and blew; a horrid machine which roared like a
wild beast, and smoked like a volcano; a species of Hydra
foaming among the breakers, and leaving behind it a dense
cloud, as it rushed on towards the town with a frightful beating
of its fins, and a throat belching forth flame. This was Durande.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>II</h4>

<h5>THE OLD STORY OF UTOPIA</h5>


<p>A steamboat was a prodigious novelty in the waters of the
Channel in 182-. The whole coast of Normandy was long
strangely excited by it. Now-a-days, ten or a dozen steam
vessels, crossing and recrossing within the bounds of the
horizon, scarcely attract a glance from loiterers on the shore.
At the most, some persons, whose interest or business it is to
note such things, will observe the indications in their smoke of
whether they burn Welsh or Newcastle coal. They pass, and
that is all. "Welcome," if coming home; "a pleasant passage,"
if outward bound.</p>

<p>Folks were less calm on the subject of these wonderful inventions
in the first quarter of the present century; and the new
and strange machines, and their long lines of smoke regarded
with no good-will by the Channel Islanders. In that Puritanical
Archipelago, where the Queen of England has been censured
for violating the Scriptures<a name="FNanchor_2_2" id="FNanchor_2_2"></a><a href="#Footnote_2_2" class="fnanchor">[2]</a> by using chloroform during her
accouchments, the first steam-vessel which made its appearance
received the name of the "Devil Boat." In the eyes of these
worthy fishermen, once Catholics, now Calvinists, but always
bigots, it seemed to be a portion of the infernal regions which
had been somehow set afloat. A local preacher selected for his
discourse the question of "Whether man has the right to make
fire and water work together when God had divided them.<a name="FNanchor_3_3" id="FNanchor_3_3"></a><a href="#Footnote_3_3" class="fnanchor">[3]</a>
This beast, composed of iron and fire, did it not resemble
Leviathan? Was it not an attempt to bring chaos again into
the universe? This is not the only occasion on which the progress
of civilisation has been stigmatised as a return to chaos.</p>

<p>"A mad notion—a gross delusion—an absurdity!" Such
was the verdict of the Academy of Sciences when consulted by
Napoleon on the subject of steamboats, early in the present
century. The poor fishermen of St. Sampson may be excused
for not being, in scientific matters, any wiser than the mathematicians
of Paris; and in religious matters, a little island like
Guernsey is not bound to be more enlightened than a great
continent like America. In the year 1807, when the first
steamboat of Fulton, commanded by Livingston, furnished
with one of Watt's engines, sent from England, and manœuvred,
besides her ordinary crew, by two Frenchmen only, André
Michaux and another, made her first voyage from New York to
Albany, it happened that she set sail on the 17th of August.
The Methodists took up this important fact, and in numberless
chapels, preachers were heard calling down a malediction on
the machine, and declaring that this number 17 was no other
than the total of the ten horns and seven heads of the beast of
the Apocalypse. In America, they invoked against the steamboats
the beast from the book of Revelation; in Europe, the
reptile of the book of Genesis. This was the simple difference.</p>

<p>The savants had rejected steamboats as impossible; the
priests had anathematised them as impious. Science had condemned,
and religion consigned them to perdition. Fulton
was a new incarnation of Lucifer. The simple people on the
coasts and in the villages were confirmed in their prejudice by
the uneasiness which they felt at the outlandish sight. The
religious view of steamboats may be summed up as follows:
Water and fire were divorced at the creation. This divorce was
enjoined by God himself. Man has no right to join what his
Maker has put asunder; to reunite what he has disunited. The
peasants' view was simply, "I don't like the look of this thing."</p>

<p>No one but Mess Lethierry, perhaps, could have been found
at that early period daring enough to dream of such an enterprise
as the establishment of a steam-vessel between Guernsey
and St. Malo. He, alone, as an independent thinker, was
capable of conceiving such an idea, or, as a hardy mariner, of
carrying it out. The French part of his nature, probably, conceived
the idea; the English part supplied the energy to put it
in execution.</p>

<p>How and when this was, we are about to inform the reader.</p>

<div class="footnotes"><h3>FOOTNOTES:</h3>

<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_2_2" id="Footnote_2_2"></a><a href="#FNanchor_2_2"><span class="label">[2]</span></a> Genesis, chap. iii. v. 16.</p></div>

<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_3_3" id="Footnote_3_3"></a><a href="#FNanchor_3_3"><span class="label">[3]</span></a> Genesis, chap. i. v. 4.</p></div>
</div>


<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>III</h4>

<h5>RANTAINE</h5>


<p>About forty years before the period of the commencement of
our narrative, there stood in the suburbs of Paris, near the city
wall, between the Fosse-aux-Loups and the Tombe-Issoire, a
house of doubtful reputation. It was a lonely, ruinous building,
evidently a place for dark deeds on an occasion. Here lived,
with his wife and child, a species of town bandit; a man who
had been clerk to an attorney practising at the Châtelet—he
figured somewhat later at the Assize Court; the name of this
family was Rantaine. On a mahogany chest of drawers in the
old house were two china cups, ornamented with flowers, on
one of which appeared, in gilt letters, the words, "A souvenir of
friendship;" on the other, "A token of esteem." The child
lived in an atmosphere of vice in this miserable home. The
father and mother having belonged to the lower middle class,
the boy had learnt to read, and they brought it up in a fashion.
The mother, pale and almost in rags, gave "instruction," as she
called it, mechanically, to the little one, heard it spell a few
words to her, and interrupted the lesson to accompany her
husband on some criminal expedition, or to earn the wages of
prostitution. Meanwhile, the book remained open on the
table as she had left it, and the boy sat beside it, meditating in
his way.</p>

<p>The father and mother, detected one day in one of their
criminal enterprises, suddenly vanished into that obscurity in
which the penal laws envelop convicted malefactors. The
child, too, disappeared.</p>

<p>Lethierry, in his wanderings about the world, stumbled, one
day, on an adventurer like himself; helped him out of some
scrape; rendered him a kindly service, and was apparently
repaid with gratitude. He took a fancy to the stranger, picked
him up, and brought him to Guernsey, where, finding him intelligent
in learning the duties of a sailor aboard a coasting vessel,
he made him a companion. This stranger was the little Rantaine,
now grown up to manhood.</p>

<p>Rantaine, like Lethierry, had a bull neck, a large and powerful
breadth of shoulders for carrying burdens, and loins like
those of the Farnese Hercules. Lethierry and he had a remarkable
similarity of appearance: Rantaine was the taller. People
who saw their forms behind as they were walking side by side
along the port, exclaimed, "There are two brothers." On
looking them in the face the effect was different: all that was
open in the countenance of Lethierry was reserved and cautious
in that of Rantaine. Rantaine was an expert swordsman,
played on the harmonica, could snuff a candle at twenty paces
with a pistol-ball, could strike a tremendous blow with the fist,
recite verses from Voltaire's <i>Henriade</i>, and interpret dreams;
he knew by heart <i>Les Tombeaux de Saint Denis</i>, by Treneuil.
He talked sometimes of having had relations with the Sultan of
Calicut, "whom the Portuguese call the Zamorin." If any one
had seen the little memorandum-book which he carried about
with him, he would have found notes and jottings of this kind:
"At Lyons in a fissure of the wall of one of the cells in the
prison of St. Joseph, a file." He spoke always with a grave
deliberation; he called himself the son of a Chevalier de Saint
Louis. His linen was of a miscellaneous kind, and marked
with different initials. Nobody was ever more tender than he
was on the point of honour; he fought and killed his man.
The mother of a pretty actress could not have an eye more
watchful for an insult.</p>

<p>He might have stood for the personification of subtlety under
an outer garb of enormous strength.</p>

<p>It was the power of his fist, applied one day at a fair, upon a
<i>cabeza de moro</i>, which had originally taken the fancy of
Lethierry. No one in Guernsey knew anything of his adventures.
They were of a chequered kind. If the great theatre
of destiny had a special wardrobe, Rantaine ought to have
taken the dress of harlequin. He had lived, and had seen the
world. He had run through the gamut of possible trades and
qualities; had been a cook at Madagascar, trainer of birds at
Honolulu, a religious journalist at the Galapagos Islands, a
poet at Oomrawuttee, a freeman at Haiti. In this latter character
he had delivered at Grand Goave a funeral oration, of
which the local journals have preserved this fragment: "Farewell,
then, noble spirit. In the azure vault of the heavens,
where thou wingest now thy flight, thou wilt, no doubt, rejoin
the good Abbé Leander Crameau, of Little Goave. Tell him
that, thanks to ten years of glorious efforts, thou hast completed
the church of the <i>Ansa-à-Veau</i>. Adieu! transcendent
genius, model mason!" His freemason's mask did not prevent
him, as we see, wearing a little of the Roman Catholic. The
former won to his side the men of progress, and the latter the
men of order. He declared himself a white of pure caste, and
hated the negroes; though, for all that, he would certainly
have been an admirer of the Emperor Soulouque. In 1815, at
Bordeaux, the glow of his royalist enthusiasm broke forth in
the shape of a huge white feather in his cap. His life had been
a series of eclipses—of appearances, disappearances, and reappearances.
He was a sort of revolving light upon the coasts of
scampdom. He knew a little Turkish: instead of "guillotined,"
would say "<i>néboïssé</i>." He had been a slave in Tripoli, in the
house of a Thaleb, and had learnt Turkish by dint of blows with
a stick. His employment had been to stand at evenings at the
doors of the mosque, there to read aloud to the faithful the
Koran inscribed upon slips of wood, or pieces of camel leather.
It is not improbable that he was a renegade.</p>

<p>He was capable of everything, and something worse.</p>

<p>He had a trick of laughing loud and knitting his brows at the
same time. He used to say, "In politics, I esteem only men
inaccessible to influences;" or, "I am for decency and good
morals;" or, "The pyramid must be replaced upon its base."
His manner was rather cheerful and cordial than otherwise.
The expression of his mouth contradicted the sense of his words.
His nostrils had an odd way of distending themselves. In the
corners of his eyes he had a little network of wrinkles, in which all
sorts of dark thoughts seemed to meet together. It was here
alone that the secret of his physiognomy could be thoroughly
studied. His flat foot was a vulture's claw. His skull was low
at the top and large about the temples. His ill-shapen ear,
bristled with hair, seemed to say, "Beware of speaking to the
animal in this cave."</p>

<p>One fine day, in Guernsey, Rantaine was suddenly missing.</p>

<p>Lethierry's partner had absconded, leaving the treasury of
their partnership empty.</p>

<p>In this treasury there was some money of Rantaine's, no
doubt, but there were also fifty thousand francs belonging to
Lethierry.</p>

<p>By forty years of industry and probity as a coaster and ship
carpenter, Lethierry had saved one hundred thousand francs.
Rantaine robbed him of half the sum.</p>

<p>Half ruined, Lethierry did not lose heart, but began at once
to think how to repair his misfortune. A stout heart may be
ruined in fortune, but not in spirit. It was just about that time
that people began to talk of the new kind of boat to be moved
by steam-engines. Lethierry conceived the idea of trying
Fulton's invention, so much disputed about; and by one of these
fire-boats to connect the Channel Islands with the French coast.
He staked his all upon this idea; he devoted to it the wreck of
his savings. Accordingly, six months after Rantaine's flight,
the astonished people of St. Sampson beheld, issuing from the
port, a vessel discharging huge volumes of smoke, and looking
like a ship a-fire at sea. This was the first steam-vessel to
navigate the Channel.</p>

<p>This vessel, to which the people in their dislike and contempt
for novelty immediately gave the nickname of "Lethierry's
Galley," was announced as intended to maintain a constant
communication between Guernsey and St. Malo.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>IV</h4>

<h5>CONTINUATION OF THE STORY OF UTOPIA</h5>


<p>It may be well imagined that the new enterprise did not prosper
much at first. The owners of cutters passing between the
Island of Guernsey and the French coast were loud in their
outcries. They denounced this attack upon the Holy Scriptures
and their monopoly. The chapels began to fulminate against
it. One reverend gentleman, named Elihu, stigmatised the
new steam-vessel as an "atheistical construction," and the
sailing-boat was declared the only orthodox craft. The people
saw the horns of the devil among the beasts which the fireship
carried to and fro. This storm of protest continued a considerable
time. At last, however, it began to be perceived that
these animals arrived less tired and sold better, their meat being
superior; that the sea risk was less also for passengers; that
this mode of travelling was less expensive, shorter, and more
sure; that they started at a fixed time, and arrived at a fixed
time; that consignments of fish travelling faster arrived fresher,
and that it was now possible to find a sale in the French markets
for the surplus of great takes of fish so common in Guernsey.
The butter, too, from the far-famed Guernsey cows, made the
passage quicker in the "Devil Boat" than in the old sailing
vessels, and lost nothing of its good quality, insomuch that
Dinan, in Brittany, began to become a customer for it, as well
as St. Brieuc and Rennes. In short, thanks to what they called
"Lethierry's Galley," the people enjoyed safe travelling,
regular communication, prompt and easy passages to and fro,
an increase of circulation, an extension of markets and of
commerce, and, finally, it was felt that it was necessary to
patronise this "Devil Boat," which flew in the face of the Holy
Scriptures, and brought wealth to the island. Some daring
spirits even went so far as to express a positive satisfaction at it.
Sieur Landoys, the registrar, bestowed his approval upon the
vessel—an undoubted piece of impartiality on his part, as he did
not like Lethierry. For, first of all, Lethierry was entitled to
the dignity of "Mess," while Landoys was merely "Sieur
Landoys." Then, although registrar of St. Peter's Port,
Landoys was a parishioner of St. Sampson. Now, there was
not in the entire parish another man besides them devoid of
prejudices. It seemed little enough, therefore, to indulge
themselves with a detestation of each other. Two of a trade,
says the proverb, rarely agree.</p>

<p>Sieur Landoys, however, had the honesty to support the
steamboat. Others followed Landoys. By little and little,
these facts multiplied. The growth of opinion is like the rising
tide. Time and the continued and increasing success of the
venture, with the evidence of real service rendered and the
improvement in the general welfare, gradually converted the
people; and the day at length arrived when, with the exception
of a few wiseacres, every one admired "Lethierry's Galley."</p>

<p>It would probably win less admiration now-a-days. This
steamboat of forty years since would doubtless provoke a smile
among our modern boat-builders; for this marvel was ill-shaped;
this prodigy was clumsy and infirm.</p>

<p>The distance between our grand Atlantic steam-vessels of the
present day and the boats with wheel-paddles which Denis
Papin floated on the Fulda in 1707, is not greater than that
between a three-decker, like the <i>Montebello</i>, 200 feet long,
having a mainyard of 115 feet, carrying a weight of 3000 tons,
1100 men, 120 guns, 10,000 cannon-balls, and 160 packages of
canister, belching forth at every broadside, when in action,
3300 pounds of iron, and spreading to the wind, when it moves,
5600 square mètres of canvas, and the old Danish galley of the
second century, discovered, full of stone hatchets, and bows and
clubs, in the mud of the seashore, at Wester-Satrup, and preserved
at the Hotel de Ville at Flensburg.</p>

<p>Exactly one hundred years—from 1707 to 1807—separate
the first paddle-boat of Papin from the first steamboat of Fulton.
"Lethierry's Galley" was assuredly a great improvement upon
those two rough sketches; but it was itself only a sketch. For
all that, it was a masterpiece in its way. Every scientific discovery
in embryo presents that double aspect—a monster in
the fœtus, a marvel in the germ.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>V</h4>

<h5>THE DEVIL BOAT</h5>


<p>"Lethierry's Galley" was not masted with a view to sailing
well; a fact which was not a defect; it is, indeed, one of the laws
of naval construction. Besides, her motive power being steam,
her sails were only accessory. A paddle steamboat, moreover,
is almost insensible to sails. The new steam-vessel was too
short, round, and thick-set. She had too much bow, and too
great a breadth of quarter. The daring of inventors had not
yet reached the point of making a steam-vessel light; Lethierry's
boat had some of the defects of Gilliatt's Dutch sloop. She
pitched very little, but she rolled a good deal. Her paddle-boxes
were too high. She had too much beam for her length.
The massive machinery encumbered her, and to make her
capable of carrying a heavy cargo, her constructors had raised
her bulwarks to an unusual height, giving to the vessel the
defects of old seventy-fours, a bastard model which would have
to be cut down to render them really seaworthy, or fit to go into
action. Being short, she ought to have been able to veer
quickly—the time employed in a manœuvre of that kind being
in proportion to the length of the vessel—but her weight deprived
her of the advantage of her shortness. Her midship-frame was
too broad, a fact which retarded her; the resistance of the sea
being proportioned to the largest section below the water-line,
and to the square of the speed. Her prow was vertical, which
would not be regarded as a fault at the present day, but at that
period this portion of the construction was invariably sloped at
an angle of forty-five degrees. All the curving lines of the hull
agreed well together, but it was not long enough for oblique
sailing, or for lying parallel with the water displaced, which
should always be thrown off laterally. In rough weather she
drew too much water, sometimes fore, sometimes aft, which
showed that her centre of gravity was not rightly adjusted.
Owing to the weight of the engine, the cargo shifted, so that the
centre of gravity was often aft of the mainmast, and then
steam power had to be resorted to, for at such times the mainsail
had to be furled as it only made the vessel fall off. If close
to the wind, very careful manœuvring was required. The
rudder was the old-fashioned bar-rudder, not the wheeled one of
the present time. Two skiffs, a species of <i>you-yous</i>, were suspended
to the davits. The vessel had four anchors; the sheet-anchor,
the second or working anchor, and two bower-anchors.
These four anchors, slung by chains, were moved, according to
the occasion, by the great capstan of the poop, or by the small
capstan at the prow. At that period the pump windlass had
not superseded the intermitting efforts of the old handspike.
Having only two bower-anchors, one on the starboard and the
other on the larboard side, the vessel could not move conveniently
in certain winds, though she could aid herself at such
times with the second anchor. Her buoys were normal, and so
constructed that they carried the weight of the buoy-ropes
without dipping. The launch was of a useful size, of service in
all cases of need, and able to raise the main anchor. A novelty
about her was that she was rigged with chains, which in no way
detracted, however, from the mobility of the running rigging,
or from the firmness of the standing rigging. The masts,
yards, etc., although not of first-rate quality, were not in any
way amiss, and the rigging at the mast-head was not very
noticeable. The ribs were solid, but coarse, less delicacy of
wood being required for steam than for sail. Her speed was
six knots an hour. When lying-to she rode well. Take her as
she was, "Lethierry's Galley" was a good sea boat; but people
felt, that in moments of danger from reefs or waterspouts, she
would be hardly manageable. Unhappily her build made her
roll about on the waves, with a perpetual creaking like that of
a new shoe.</p>

<p>She was, above all, a merchandise boat, and, like all ships built
more for commerce than for fighting, was constructed exclusively
with a view to stowage. She carried few passengers. The
transport of cattle rendered stowage difficult and very peculiar.
Vessels carried bullocks at that time in the hold, which was a
complication of the difficulty. At the present day they are
stowed on the fore-deck. The paddle-boxes of Lethierry's
"Devil Boat" were painted white, the hull, down to the water-line,
red, and all the rest of the vessel black, according to the
somewhat ugly fashion of this century. When empty she drew
seven feet of water, and when laden fourteen.</p>

<p>With regard to the engine, it was of considerable power. To
speak exactly, its power was equal to that of one horse to every
three tons burden, which is almost equal to that of a tugboat.
The paddles were well placed, a little in advance of the centre of
gravity of the vessel. The maximum pressure of the engine
was equal to two atmospheres. It consumed a great deal of
coal, although it was constructed on the condensation and
expansion principles. It had no fly-wheel on account of the
instability of the point of support, but this was then, as now,
compensated for by two cranks at the extremities of the revolving
shaft, so arranged that one was always at right angles when
the other was at dead-point. The whole rested on a single
sheet of cast-iron, so that even in case of any serious damage,
no shock of the waves could upset its equilibrium, and even if
the hull were injured the engine would remain intact. To
render it stronger still, the connecting-rod had been placed near
the steam-cylinders, so that the centre of oscillation of the
working-beam was transferred from the middle to the end.
Since then oscillating cylinders have been invented which do
away with the necessity of connecting-rods, but in those days
the placing of the connecting-rod near the cylinder was thought
a triumph of engineering. The boiler was in sections and
provided with a salt-water pump. The wheels were very large,
which lessened the loss of power; the smoke-stack was lofty,
which increased the draught. On the other hand, the size of
the wheels exposed them to the force of the waves, and the
height of the smoke-stack to the violence of the wind. Wooden
paddle-floats, iron clamps, bosses of cast-iron—such were the
wheels, which, well constructed, could, strange though it may
seem, be taken to pieces. Three floats were always under
water. The speed of the centre of the floats only exceeded by
a sixth the speed of the vessel itself; this was the chief defect
of the wheels. Moreover, the cranks were too long, and the
slide-valve caused too much friction in the admission of steam
into the cylinder. For that period the engine seemed, and
indeed was, admirable. It had been constructed in France, at
the works at Bercy. Mess Lethierry had roughly sketched it:
the engineer who had constructed it in accordance with his
diagram was dead, so that the engine was unique, and probably
could not have been replaced. The designer still lived, but the
constructor was no more.</p>

<p>The engine had cost forty thousand francs.</p>

<p>Lethierry had himself constructed the "Devil Boat" upon
the great covered stocks by the side of the first tower between
St. Peter's Port and St. Sampson. He had been to Brême to
buy the wood. All his skill as a shipwright was exhausted in
its construction; his ingenuity might be seen in the planks, the
seams of which were straight and even, and covered with
sarangousti, an Indian mastic, better than resin. The sheathing
was well beaten. To remedy the roundness of the hull,
Lethierry had fitted out a boom at the bowsprit, which allowed
him to add a false spritsail to the regular one. On the day of
the launch, he cried aloud, "At last I am afloat!" The vessel
was successful, in fact, as the reader has already learnt.</p>

<p>Either by chance or design she had been launched on the 14th
of July, the anniversary of the taking of the Bastille. On that
day, mounted upon the bridge between the two paddle-boxes,
looked Lethierry upon the sea, and exclaimed, "It is your turn
now! The Parisians took the Bastille, now science takes the
sea."</p>

<p>Lethierry's boat made the voyage from Guernsey to St. Malo
once a week. She started on the Tuesday morning, and returned
on the Friday evening, in time for the Saturday market. She
was a stronger craft than any of the largest coasting sloops in
all the Archipelago, and her capacity being in proportion to her
dimensions, one of her voyages was equal to four voyages of an
ordinary boat in the same trade; hence they were very profitable.
The reputation of a vessel depends on its stowage, and Lethierry
was an admirable stower of cargo. When he was no longer able
to work himself, he trained up a sailor to undertake this duty.
At the end of two years, the steamboat brought in a clear seven
hundred and fifty pounds sterling a year, or eighteen thousand
francs. The pound sterling of Guernsey is worth twenty-four
francs only, that of England twenty-five, and that of Jersey
twenty-six. These differences are less unimportant than they
seem: the banks, at all events, know how to turn them to
advantage.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VI</h4>

<h5>LETHIERRY'S EXALTATION</h5>


<p>The "Devil Boat" prospered. Mess Lethierry began to look
forward to the time when he should be called "Monsieur." At
Guernsey, people do not become "Monsieurs" at one bound.
Between the plain man and the gentleman, there is quite a scale
to climb. To begin with, we have the simple name, plain
"Peter," let us suppose; the second step is "Neighbour
Peter;" the third, "Father Peter;" the fourth, "Sieur Peter;"
the fifth, "Mess Peter;" and then we reach the summit in
"Monsieur Peter."</p>

<p>This scale ascending thus from the ground is carried to still
greater heights. All the upper classes of England join on and
continue it. Here are the various steps, becoming more and
more glorious. Above the Monsieur, or "Mr.," there is the
"Esquire;" above the squire, the knight; above the knight,
still rising, we have the baronet, the Scotch laird, the baron, the
viscount, the earl (called count in France, and jarl in Norway);
the marquis, the duke, the prince of the blood royal, and the
king: so, by degrees, we ascend from the people to the middle
class, from the middle class to the baronetage, from the
baronetage to the peerage, from the peerage to royalty.</p>

<p>Thanks to his successful ingenuity, thanks to steam, and his
engines, and the "Devil Boat," Mess Lethierry was fast becoming
an important personage. When building his vessel he had
been compelled to borrow money. He had become indebted
at Brême, he had become indebted at St. Malo; but every
year he diminished his obligations.</p>

<p>He had, moreover, purchased on credit, at the very entrance
to the port of St. Sampson, a pretty stone-built house, entirely
new, situate between the sea and a garden. On the corner of
this house was inscribed the name of the "Bravées." Its
front formed a part of the wall of the port itself, and it was remarkable
for a double row of windows: on the north, alongside
a little enclosure filled with flowers, and on the south commanding
a view of the ocean. It had thus two <i>façades</i>, one open to
the tempest and the sea, the other looking into a garden filled
with roses.</p>

<p>These two frontages seemed made for the two inmates of the
house—Mess Lethierry and Déruchette.</p>

<p>The "Bravées" was popular at St. Sampson, for Mess
Lethierry had at length become a popular man. This popularity
was due partly to his good nature, his devotedness, and
his courage; partly to the number of lives he had saved; and a
great deal to his success, and to the fact that he had awarded to
St. Sampson the honour of being the port of the departure and
arrival of the new steamboat. Having made the discovery that
the "Devil Boat" was decidedly a success, St. Peter's, the
capital, desired to obtain it for that port, but Lethierry held
fast to St. Sampson. It was his native town. "It was there
that I was first pitched into the water," he used to say; hence
his great local popularity. His position as a small landed
proprietor paying land-tax, made him, what they call in
Guernsey, an <i>unhabitant</i>. He was chosen douzenier. The
poor sailor had mounted five out of six steps of the Guernsey
social scale; he had attained the dignity of "Mess"; he was
rapidly approaching the Monsieur; and who could predict
whether he might not even rise higher than that? who could
say that they might not one day find in the almanack of
Guernsey, under the heading of "Nobility and Gentry," the
astonishing and superb inscription,—<i>Lethierry, Esq.</i>?</p>

<p>But Mess Lethierry had nothing of vanity in his nature, or
he had no sense of it; or if he had, disdained it: to know that
he was useful was his greatest pleasure; to be popular touched
him less than being necessary; he had, as we have already said,
only two objects of delight, and consequently only two ambitions:
the Durande and Déruchette.</p>

<p>However this may have been, he had embarked in the lottery
of the sea, and had gained the chief prize.</p>

<p>This chief prize was the Durande steaming away in all her
pride.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VII</h4>

<h5>THE SAME GODFATHER AND THE SAME PATRON SAINT</h5>


<p>Having created his steamboat, Lethierry had christened it: he
had called it Durande—"La Durande." We will speak of her
henceforth by no other name; we will claim the liberty, also,
in spite of typographical usage, of not italicising this name
Durande; conforming in this to the notion of Mess Lethierry,
in whose eyes La Durande was almost a living person.</p>

<p>Durande and Déruchette are the same name. Déruchette is
the diminutive.</p>

<p>This diminutive is very common in France.</p>

<p>In the country the names of saints are endowed with all these
diminutives as well as all their augmentatives. One might
suppose there were several persons when there is, in fact, only
one. This system of patrons and patronesses under different
names is by no means rare. Lise, Lisette, Lisa, Elisa, Isabelle,
Lisbeth, Betsy, all these are simply Elizabeth. It is probable
that Mahout, Maclou, Malo, and Magloire are the same saint:
this, however, we do not vouch for.</p>

<p>Saint Durande is a saint of l'Angoumois, and of the Charente;
whether she is an orthodox member of the calendar is a question
for the Bollandists: orthodox or not, she has been made the
patron saint of numerous chapels.</p>

<p>It was while Lethierry was a young sailor at Rochefort that
he had made the acquaintance of this saint, probably in the
person of some pretty Charantaise, perhaps in that of the
grisette with the white nails. The saint had remained sufficiently
in his memory for him to give the name to the two things
which he loved most—Durande to the steamboat, Déruchette
to the girl.</p>

<p>Of one he was the father, of the other the uncle.</p>

<p>Déruchette was the daughter of a brother who had died: she
was an orphan child: he had adopted her, and had taken the
place both of father and mother.</p>

<p>Déruchette was not only his niece, she was his godchild; he
had held her in his arms at the baptismal font; it was he who
had chosen her patron saint, Durande, and her Christian name,
Déruchette.</p>

<p>Déruchette, as we have said, was born at St. Peter's Port.
Her name was inscribed at its date on the register of the parish.</p>

<p>As long as the niece was a child, and the uncle poor, nobody
took heed of her appellation of Déruchette; but when the little
girl became a miss, and the sailor a gentleman, the name of
Déruchette shocked the feelings of Guernsey society. The uncouthness
of the sound astonished every one. Folks asked
Mess Lethierry "why Déruchette?" He answered, "It is a
very good name in its way." Several attempts were made to
get him to obtain a change in the baptismal name, but he would
be no party to them. One day, a fine lady of the upper circle of
society in St. Sampson, the wife of a rich retired ironfounder,
said to Mess Lethierry, "In future, I shall call your daughter
Nancy."</p>

<p>"If names of country towns are in fashion," said he, "why
not Lons le Saulnier?" The fine lady did not yield her point,
and on the morrow said, "We are determined not to have it
Déruchette; I have found for your daughter a pretty name—<i>Marianne</i>."
"A very pretty name, indeed," replied Mess
Lethierry, "composed of two words which signify—a husband
and an ass."<a name="FNanchor_4_4" id="FNanchor_4_4"></a><a href="#Footnote_4_4" class="fnanchor">[4]</a> He held fast to Déruchette.</p>

<p>It would be a mistake to infer from Lethierry's pun that he
had no wish to see his niece married. He desired to see her
married, certainly; but in his own way: he intended her to have
a husband after his own heart, one who would work hard, and
whose wife would have little to do. He liked rough hands in a
man, and delicate ones in a woman. To prevent Déruchette
spoiling her pretty hands he had always brought her up like a
young lady; he had provided her with a music-master, a piano,
a little library, and a few needles and threads in a pretty work-basket.
She was, indeed, more often reading than stitching;
more often playing than reading. This was as Mess Lethierry
wished it. To be charming was all that he expected of her.
He had reared the young girl like a flower. Whoever has studied
the character of sailors will understand this: rude and hard in
their nature, they have an odd partiality for grace and delicacy.
To realise the idea of the uncle, the niece ought to have been
rich; so indeed felt Mess Lethierry. His steamboat voyaged
for this end. The mission of Durande was to provide a marriage
portion for Déruchette.</p>
<p></p>
<div class="footnotes"><h3>FOOTNOTES:</h3>

<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_4_4" id="Footnote_4_4"></a><a href="#FNanchor_4_4"><span class="label">[4]</span></a> A play upon the French words, <i>mari</i> and <i>âne</i>.</p></div>
</div>


<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>VIII</h4>

<h5>"BONNIE DUNDEE"</h5>


<p>Déruchette occupied the prettiest room at the Bravées. It
had two windows, was furnished with various articles made of
fine-grained mahogany, had a bed with four curtains, green and
white, and looked out upon the garden, and beyond it towards
the high hill, on which stands the Vale Castle. Gilliatt's house,
the Bû de la Rue, was on the other side of this hill.</p>

<p>Déruchette had her music and piano in this chamber; she accompanied
herself on the instrument when singing the melody
which she preferred—the melancholy Scottish air of "Bonnie
Dundee." The very spirit of night breathes in this melody;
but her voice was full of the freshness of dawn. The contrast
was quaint and pleasing; people said, "Miss Déruchette is at
her piano."</p>

<p>The passers-by at the foot of the hill stopped sometimes
before the wall of the garden of the Bravées to listen to that
sweet voice and plaintive song.</p>

<p>Déruchette was the very embodiment of joy as she went to
and fro in the house. She brought with her a perpetual spring.
She was beautiful, but more pretty than beautiful; and still
more graceful than pretty. She reminded the good old pilots,
friends of Mess Lethierry, of that princess in the song which the
soldiers and sailors sing, who was so beautiful:</p>

<p class="center">"Qu'elle passait pour telle dans le regiment."</p>

<p>Mess Lethierry used to say, "She has a head of hair like a ship's
cable."</p>

<p>From her infancy she had been remarkable for beauty. The
learned in such matters had grave doubts about her nose, but
the little one having probably determined to be pretty, had
finally satisfied their requirements. She grew to girlhood without
any serious loss of beauty; her nose became neither too
long nor too short; and when grown up, her critics admitted
her to be charming.</p>

<p>She never addressed her uncle otherwise than as father.</p>

<p>Lethierry allowed her to soil her fingers a little in gardening,
and even in some kind of household duties: she watered her
beds of pink hollyhocks, purple foxgloves, perennial phloxes,
and scarlet herb bennets. She took good advantage of the
climate of Guernsey, so favourable to flowers. She had, like
many other persons there, aloes in the open ground, and, what
is more difficult, she succeeded in cultivating the Nepaulese
cinquefoil. Her little kitchen-garden was scientifically arranged;
she was able to produce from it several kinds of rare
vegetables. She sowed Dutch cauliflower and Brussels cabbages,
which she thinned out in July, turnips for August, endive for
September, short parsnip for the autumn, and rampions for
winter. Mess Lethierry did not interfere with her in this, so
long as she did not handle the spade and rake too much, or
meddle with the coarser kinds of garden labour. He had provided
her with two servants, one named Grace, and the other
Douce, which are favourite names in Guernsey. Grace and
Douce did the hard work of the house and garden, and they had
the right to have red hands.</p>

<p>With regard to Mess Lethierry, his room was a little retreat
with a view over the harbour, and communicating with the
great lower room of the ground floor, on which was situated the
door of the house, near which the various staircases met.</p>

<p>His room was furnished with his hammock, his chronometer,
and his pipe: there were also a table and a chair. The ceiling
had been whitewashed, as well as the four walls. A fine marine
map, bearing the inscription <i>W. Faden</i>, 5 Charing Cross, Geographer
to His Majesty, and representing the Channel Islands,
was nailed up at the side of the door, and on the left, stretched
out and fastened with other nails, appeared one of those large
cotton handkerchiefs on which are printed, in colours, the
signals of all countries in the world, having at the four corners
the standards of France, Russia, Spain, and the United States,
and in the centre the union-jack of England.</p>

<p>Douce and Grace were two faithful creatures within certain
limits. Douce was good-natured enough, and Grace was
probably good-looking. Douce was unmarried, and had secretly
"a gallant." In the Channel Islands the word is common, as
indeed is the fact itself. The two girl's regarded as servants
had something of the Creole in their character, a sort of slowness
in their movements, not out of keeping with the Norman
spirit pervading the relations of servant and master in the
Channel Islands. Grace, coquettish and good-looking, was
always scanning the future with a nervous anxiety. This arose
from the fact of her not only having, like Douce, "a gallant,"
but also, as the scandal-loving averred, a sailor husband, whose
return one day was a thing she dreaded. This, however, does
not concern us. In a household less austere and less innocent,
Douce would have continued to be the servant, but Grace would
have become the <i>soubrette</i>. The dangerous talents of Grace
were lost upon a young mistress so pure and good as Déruchette.
For the rest, the intrigues of Douce and Grace were cautiously
concealed. Mess Lethierry knew nothing of such matters, and
no token of them had ever reached Déruchette.</p>

<p>The lower room of the ground floor, a hall with a large fireplace
and surrounded with benches and tables, had served in
the last century as a meeting-place for a conventicle of French
Protestant refugees. The sole ornament of the bare stone wall
was a sheet of parchment, set in a frame of black wood, on which
were represented some of the charitable deeds of the great
Bossuet, Bishop of Meaux. Some poor diocesans of this famous
orator, surnamed the "Eagle," persecuted by him at the time
of the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, and driven to take
shelter at Guernsey, had hung this picture on the wall to preserve
the remembrance of those facts. The spectator who had
the patience to decipher a rude handwriting in faded ink might
have learnt the following facts, which are but little known:—"29th
October, 1685, Monsieur the Bishop of Meaux, appeals
to the king to destroy the temples of Morcef and Nanteuil"—"2nd
April, 1686, Arrest of Cochard, father and son, for their
religious opinions, at the request of Monsieur the Bishop of
Meaux. Released: the Cochards having recanted."—"28th
October, 1699, Monsieur the Bishop of Meaux sent to Mde.
Pontchartrain a petition of remonstrance, pointing out that it
will be necessary to place the young ladies named Chalandes
and de Neuville, who are of the reformed religion, in the House
of the 'New Catholics' at Paris."—"7th July, 1703, the
king's order executed as requested by Monsieur the Bishop of
Meaux, for shutting up in an asylum Baudouin and his wife,
two bad Catholics of Fublaines."</p>

<p>At the end of the hall, near the door of Mess Lethierry's
room, was a little corner with a wooden partition, which had
been the Huguenot's sanctum, and had become, thanks to its
row of rails and a small hole to pass paper or money through,
the steamboat office; that is to say, the office of the Durande,
kept by Mess Lethierry in person. Upon the old oaken reading-desk,
where once rested the Holy Bible, lay a great ledger with
its alternate pages headed Dr. and Cr.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>IX</h4>

<h5>THE MAN WHO DISCOVERED RANTAINE'S CHARACTER</h5>


<p>As long as Mess Lethierry had been able to do duty, he had
commanded the Durande, and had had no other pilot or captain
but himself; but a time had come, as we have said, when he
had been compelled to find a successor. He had chosen for
that purpose Sieur Clubin, of Torteval, a taciturn man. Sieur
Clubin had a character upon the coast for strict probity. He
became the <i>alter ego</i>, the double, of Mess Lethierry.</p>

<p>Sieur Clubin, although he had rather the look of a notary
than of a sailor, was a mariner of rare skill. He had all the
talents which are required to meet dangers of every kind. He
was a skilful stower, a safe man aloft, an able and careful boatswain,
a powerful steersman, an experienced pilot, and a bold
captain. He was prudent, and he carried his prudence sometimes
to the point of daring, which is a great quality at sea.
His natural apprehensiveness of danger was tempered by a
strong instinct of what was possible in an emergency. He was
one of those mariners who will face risks to a point perfectly
well known to themselves, and who generally manage to come
successfully out of every peril. Every certainty which a man
can command, dealing with so fickle an element as the sea, he
possessed. Sieur Clubin, moreover, was a renowned swimmer;
he was one of that race of men broken into the buffeting of the
waves, who can remain as long as they please in the water—who
can start from the Havre-des-Pas at Jersey, double the
Colettes, swim round the Hermitage and Castle Elizabeth, and
return in two hours to the point from which they started. He
came from Torteval, where he had the reputation of often having
swum across the passage so much dreaded, from the Hanway
rocks to the point of Pleinmont.</p>

<p>One circumstance which had recommended Sieur Clubin to
Mess Lethierry more than any other, was his having judged
correctly the character of Rantaine. He had pointed out to
Lethierry the dishonesty of the man, and had said "Rantaine
will rob you." His prediction was verified. More than once—in
matters, it is true, not very important—Mess Lethierry had
put his ever-scrupulous honesty to the proof; and he freely
communicated with him on the subject of his affairs. Mess
Lethierry used to say, "A good conscience expects to be treated
with perfect confidence."</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>X</h4>

<h5>LONG YARNS</h5>


<p>Mess Lethierry, for the sake of his own ease, always wore his
seafaring clothes, and preferred his tarpaulin overcoat to his
pilot jacket. Déruchette felt vexed, occasionally, about this
peculiarity. Nothing is prettier than a pouting beauty. She
laughed and scolded. "My dear father," she would say, "what
a smell of pitch!" and she would give him a gentle tap upon his
broad shoulders.</p>

<p>This good old seaman had gathered from his voyages many
wonderful stories. He had seen at Madagascar birds' feathers,
three of which sufficed to make a roof of a house. He had seen
in India, field sorrel, the stalks of which were nine inches high.
In New Holland he had seen troops of turkeys and geese led
about and guarded by a bird, like a flock by a shepherd's dog;
this bird was called the Agami. He had visited elephants'
cemeteries. In Africa, he had encountered gorillas, a terrible
species of man-monkey. He knew the ways of all the ape tribe,
from the wild dog-faced monkey, which he called the Macaco-bravo,
to the howling monkey or <i>Macaco-barbado</i>. In Chili,
he had seen a pouched monkey move the compassion of the
huntsman by showing its little one. He had seen in California
a hollow trunk of a tree fall to the ground, so vast that a man
on horseback could ride one hundred paces inside. In Morocco,
he had seen the Mozabites and the Bisskris fighting with matraks
and bars of iron—the Bisskris, because they had been called
<i>kelbs</i>, which means dogs; and the Mozabites, because they had
been treated as <i>khamsi</i>, which means people of the fifth sect.
He had seen in China the pirate Chanh-thong-quan-larh-Quoi cut
to pieces for having assassinated the Ap of a village. At Thu-dan-mot,
he had seen a lion carry off an old woman in the open
market-place. He was present at the arrival of the Great
Serpent brought from Canton to Saigon to celebrate in the
pagoda of Cho-len the fête of Quan-nam, the goddess of navigators.
He had beheld the great Quan-Sû among the Moi. At
Rio de Janeiro, he had seen the Brazilian ladies in the evening
put little balls of gauze into their hair, each containing a beautiful
kind of firefly; and the whole forming a head-dress of little
twinkling lights. He had combated in Paraguay with swarms
of enormous ants and spiders, big and downy as an infant's head,
and compassing with their long legs a third of a yard, and attacking
men by pricking them with their bristles, which enter the
skin as sharp as arrows, and raise painful blisters. On the river
Arinos, a tributary of the Tocantins, in the virgin forests to the
north of Diamantina, he had determined the existence of the
famous bat-shaped people, the Murcilagos, or men who are
born with white hair and red eyes, who live in the shady solitudes
of the woods, sleep by day, awake by night, and fish and hunt
in the dark, seeing better then than by the light of the moon.
He told how, near Beyrout, once in an encampment of an expedition
of which he formed part, a rain gauge belonging to one of
the party happened to be stolen from a tent. A wizard, wearing
two or three strips of leather only, and looking like a man having
nothing on but his braces, thereupon rang a bell at the end of
a horn so violently, that a hyena finally answered the summons
by bringing back the missing instrument. The hyena was, in
fact, the thief. These veritable histories bore a strong resemblance
to fictions; but they amused Déruchette.</p>

<p>The <i>poupée</i> or "doll" of the Durande, as the people of the
Channel Islands call the figure-head of a ship, was the connecting
link between the vessel and Lethierry's niece. In the
Norman Islands the figure-head of a ship, a roughly-carved
wooden statue, is called the Poupée. Hence the local saying,
meaning to sail, "<i>être entre poupe et poupée</i>."</p>

<p>The <i>poupée</i> of the Durande was particularly dear to Mess
Lethierry. He had instructed the carver to make it resemble
Déruchette. It looked like a rude attempt to cut out a face
with a hatchet; or like a clumsy log trying hard to look like a
girl.</p>

<p>This unshapely block produced a great effect upon Mess
Lethierry's imagination. He looked upon it with an almost
superstitious admiration. His faith in it was complete. He
was able to trace in it an excellent resemblance to Déruchette.
Thus the dogma resembles the truth, and the idol the deity.</p>

<p>Mess Lethierry had two grand fête days in every week; one
was Tuesday, the other Friday. His first delight consisted in
seeing the Durande weigh anchor; his second in seeing her enter
the port again. He leaned upon his elbows at the window contemplating
his work, and was happy.</p>

<p>On Fridays, the presence of Mess Lethierry at his window
was a signal. When people passing the Bravées saw him lighting
his pipe, they said, "Ay! the steamboat is in sight." One
kind of smoke was the herald of the other.</p>

<p>The Durande, when she entered the port, made her cable
fast to a huge iron ring under Mess Lethierry's window, and
fixed in the basement of the house. On those nights Lethierry
slept soundly in his hammock, with a soothing consciousness of
the presence of Déruchette asleep in her room near him, and of
the Durande moored opposite.</p>

<p>The moorings of the Durande were close to the great bell of
the port. A little strip of quay passed thence before the door
of the Bravées.</p>

<p>The quay, the Bravées and its house, the garden, the alleys
bordered with edges, and the greater part even of the surrounding
houses, no longer exist. The demand for Guernsey granite
has invaded these too. The whole of this part of the town is now
occupied by stone-cutters' yards.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>XI</h4>

<h5>MATRIMONIAL PROSPECTS</h5>


<p>Déruchette was approaching womanhood, and was still unmarried.</p>

<p>Mess Lethierry in bringing her up to have white hands had
also rendered her somewhat fastidious. A training of that kind
has its disadvantages; but Lethierry was himself still more
fastidious. He would have liked to have provided at the same
time for both his idols; to have found in the guide and companion
of the one a commander for the other. What is a
husband but the pilot on the voyage of matrimony? Why not
then the same conductor for the vessel and for the girl? The
affairs of a household have their tides, their ebbs and flows, and
he who knows how to steer a bark, ought to know how to guide
a woman's destiny, subject as both are to the influences of the
moon and the wind. Sieur Clubin being only fifteen years
younger than Lethierry, would necessarily be only a provisional
master for the Durande. It would be necessary to find a young
captain, a permanent master, a true successor of the founder,
inventor, and creator of the first channel steamboat. A
captain for the Durande who should come up to his ideal, would
have been, already, almost a son-in-law in Lethierry's eyes.
Why not make him son-in-law in a double sense? The idea
pleased him. The husband <i>in posse</i> of Déruchette haunted his
dreams. His ideal was a powerful seaman, tanned and browned
by weather, a sea athlete. This, however, was not exactly the
ideal of Déruchette. Her dreams, if dreams they could even
be called, were of a more ethereal character.</p>

<p>The uncle and the niece were at all events agreed in not being
in haste to seek a solution of these problems. When Déruchette
began to be regarded as a probable heiress, a crowd of suitors
had presented themselves. Attentions under these circumstances
are not generally worth much. Mess Lethierry felt
this. He would grumble out the old French proverb, "<i>A
maiden of gold, a suitor of brass</i>." He politely showed the
fortune-seekers to the door. He was content to wait, and so
was Déruchette.</p>

<p>It was, perhaps, a singular fact, that he had little inclination
for the local aristocracy. In that respect Mess Lethierry
showed himself not entirely English. It will hardly be believed
that he even refused for Déruchette a Ganduel of Jersey, and a
Bugnet Nicolin of Sark. People were bold enough to affirm,
although we doubt if this were possible, that he had even declined
the proposals of a member of the family of Edou, which
is evidently descended from "Edou-ard" (Anglicè Edward)
the Confessor.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>XII</h4>

<h5>AN ANOMALY IN THE CHARACTER OF LETHIERRY</h5>


<p>Mess Lethierry had a failing, and a serious one. He detested
a priest; though not as an individual, but as an institution.
Reading one day—for he used to read—in a work of Voltaire—for
he would even read Voltaire—the remark, that priests
"have something cat-like in their nature," he laid down the
book and was heard to mutter, "Then, I suppose, I have
something dog-like in mine."</p>

<p>It must be remembered that the priests—Lutheran and
Calvinist, as well as Catholic—had vigorously combated the
new "Devil Boat," and had persecuted its inventor. To be a
sort of revolutionist in the art of navigation, to introduce a
spirit of progress in the Norman Archipelago, to disturb the
peace of the poor little island of Guernsey with a new invention,
was in their eyes, as we have not concealed from the reader, an
abominable and most condemnable rashness. Nor had they
omitted to condemn it pretty loudly. It must not be forgotten
that we are now speaking of the Guernsey clergy of a bygone
generation, very different from that of the present time, who in
almost all the local places of worship display a laudable sympathy
with progress. They had embarrassed Lethierry in a
hundred ways; every sort of resisting force which can be
found in sermons and discourses had been employed against
him. Detested by the churchmen, he naturally came to detest
them in his turn. Their hatred was the extenuating circumstance
to be taken into account in judging of his.</p>

<p>But it must be confessed that his dislike for priests was, in
some degree, in his very nature. It was hardly necessary for
them to hate him in order to inspire him with aversion. As he
said, he moved among them like the dog among cats. He had
an antipathy to them, not only in idea, but in what is more
difficult to analyse, his instincts. He felt their secret claws,
and showed his teeth; sometimes, it must be confessed, a little
at random and out of season. It is a mistake to make no distinctions:
a dislike in the mass is a prejudice. The good
Savoyard curé would have found no favour in his eyes. It is
not certain that a worthy priest was even a possible thing in
Lethierry's mind. His philosophy was carried so far that his
good sense sometimes abandoned him. There is such a thing
as the intolerance of tolerants, as well as the violence of
moderates. But Lethierry was at bottom too good-natured to
be a thorough hater. He did not attack so much as avoid.
He kept the church people at a distance. He suffered evil at
their hands; but he confined himself to not wishing them any
good. The shade of difference, in fact, between his aversion
and theirs, lay in the fact that they bore animosity, while he
had only a strong antipathy. Small as is the island of Guernsey,
it has, unfortunately, plenty of room for differences of religion;
there, to take the broad distinction, is the Catholic faith and
the Protestant faith; every form of worship has its temple or
chapel. In Germany, at Heidelberg, for example, people are
not so particular; they divide a church in two, one half for
St. Peter, the other half for Calvin, and between the two is a
partition to prevent religious variances terminating in fisticuffs.
The shares are equal; the Catholics have three altars, the
Huguenots three altars. As the services are at the same hours,
one bell summonses both denominations to prayers; it rings, in
fact, both for God and for Satan, according as each pleases to
regard it. Nothing can be more simple.</p>

<p>The phlegmatic character of the Germans favours, I suppose,
this peculiar arrangement, but in Guernsey every religion has
its own domicile; there is the orthodox parish and the heretic
parish; the individual may choose. "Neither one nor the
other" was the choice of Mess Lethierry.</p>

<p>This sailor, workman, philosopher, and parvenu trader,
though a simple man in appearance, was by no means simple
at bottom. He had his opinions and his prejudices. On the
subject of the priests he was immovable; he would have entered
the lists with Montlosier.</p>

<p>Occasionally he indulged in rather disrespectful jokes upon
this subject. He had certain odd expressions thereupon peculiar
to himself, but significant enough. Going to confession he
called "combing one's conscience." The little learning that
he had—a certain amount of reading picked up here and there
between the squalls at sea—did not prevent his making blunders
in spelling. He made also mistakes in pronunciation, some of
which, however, gave a double sense to his words, which might
have been suspected of a sly intention. After peace had been
brought about by Waterloo between the France of Louis XVIII.
and the England of Wellington, Mess Lethierry was heard to
say, "Bour mont a été le traître d'union entre les deux camps."
On one occasion he wrote <i>pape ôté</i> for <i>papauté</i>. We do not
think these puns were intentional.</p>

<p>Though he was a strong anti-papist, that circumstance was
far from conciliating the Anglicans. He was no more liked by
the Protestant rectors than by the Catholic curés. The enunciation
of the greatest dogmas did not prevent his anti-theological
temper bursting forth. Accident, for example, having once
brought him to hear a sermon on eternal punishment, by the
Reverend Jaquemin Hérode—a magnificent discourse, filled
from one end to the other with sacred texts, proving the everlasting
pains, the tortures, the torments, the perditions, the
inexorable chastisements, the burnings without end, the inextinguishable
maledictions, the wrath of the Almighty, the
celestial fury, the divine vengeance, and other incontestable
realities—he was heard to say as he was going out in the midst
of the faithful flock, "You see, I have an odd notion of my own
on this matter; I imagine God as a merciful being."</p>

<p>This leaven of atheism was doubtless due to his sojourn in
France.</p>

<p>Although a Guernsey man of pure extraction, he was called
in the island "the Frenchman;" but chiefly on account of his
"improper" manner of speaking. He did not indeed conceal
the truth from himself. He was impregnated with ideas subversive
of established institutions. His obstinacy in constructing
the "Devil Boat" had proved that. He used to
say, "I was suckled by the '89"—a bad sort of nurse. These
were not his only indiscretions. In France "to preserve appearances,"
in England "to be respectable," is the chief condition
of a quiet life. To be respectable implies a multitude of
little observances, from the strict keeping of Sunday down to
the careful tying of a cravat. "To act so that nobody may
point at you;" this is the terrible social law. To be pointed at
with the finger is almost the same thing as an anathematisation.
Little towns, always hotbeds of gossip, are remarkable for that
isolating malignancy, which is like the tremendous malediction
of the Church seen through the wrong end of the telescope.
The bravest are afraid of this ordeal. They are ready to confront
the storm, the fire of cannon, but they shrink at the glance
of "Mrs. Grundy." Mess Lethierry was more obstinate than
logical; but under pressure even his obstinacy would bend.
He put—to use another of his phrases, eminently suggestive of
latent compromises, not always pleasant to avow—"a little
water in his wine." He kept aloof from the clergy, but he did
not absolutely close his door against them. On official occasions,
and at the customary epochs of pastoral visits, he received
with sufficiently good grace both the Lutheran rector and the
Papist chaplain. He had even, though at distant intervals,
accompanied Déruchette to the Anglican parish church, to
which Déruchette herself, as we have said, only went on the
four great festivals of the year.</p>

<p>On the whole, these little concessions, which always cost
him a pang, irritated him; and far from inclining him towards
the Church people, only increased his inward disinclination to
them. He compensated himself by more raillery. His nature,
in general so devoid of bitterness, had no uncharitable side
except this. To alter him, however, was impossible.</p>

<p>In fact, this was in his very temperament, and was beyond
his own power to control.</p>

<p>Every sort of priest or clergyman was distasteful to him.
He had a little of the old revolutionary want of reverence. He
did not distinguish between one form of worship and another.
He did not do justice to that great step in the progress of ideas,
the denial of the real presence. His shortsightedness in these
matters even prevented his perceiving any essential difference
between a minister and an abbé. A reverend doctor and a
reverend father were pretty nearly the same to him. He used
to say, "Wesley is not more to my taste than Loyola." When
he saw a reverend pastor walking with his wife, he would turn
to look at them, and mutter, "a married priest," in a tone
which brought out all the absurdity which those words had in
the ears of Frenchmen at that time. He used to relate how, on
his last voyage to England, he had seen the "Bishop<i>ess</i>" of
London. His dislike for marriages of that sort amounted
almost to disgust. "Gown and gown do not mate well," he
would say. The sacerdotal function was to him in the nature
of a distinct sex. It would have been natural to him to have
said, "Neither a man nor a woman, only a priest;" and he had
the bad taste to apply to the Anglican and the Roman Catholic
clergy the same disdainful epithets. He confounded the two
cassocks in the same phraseology. He did not take the trouble
to vary in favour of Catholics or Lutherans, or whatever they
might be, the figures of speech common among military men
of that period. He would say to Déruchette, "Marry whom
you please, provided you do not marry a parson."</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>XIII</h4>

<h5>THOUGHTLESSNESS ADDS A GRACE TO BEAUTY</h5>


<p>A word once said, Mess Lethierry remembered it: a word once
said, Déruchette soon forgot it. Here was another difference
between the uncle and the niece.</p>

<p>Brought up in the peculiar way already described, Déruchette
was little accustomed to responsibility. There is a latent
danger in an education not sufficiently serious, which cannot be
too much insisted on. It is perhaps unwise to endeavour to
make a child happy too soon.</p>

<p>So long as she was happy, Déruchette thought all was well.
She knew, too, that it was always a pleasure to her uncle to
see her pleased. The religious sentiment in her nature was
satisfied with going to the parish church four times in the year.
We have seen her in her Christmas-day toilet. Of life, she was
entirely ignorant. She had a disposition which one day might
lead her to love passionately. Meanwhile she was contented.</p>

<p>She sang by fits and starts, chatted by fits and starts, enjoyed
the hour as it passed, fulfilled some little duty, and was gone
again, and was delightful in all. Add to all this the English
sort of liberty which she enjoyed. In England the very infants
go alone, girls are their own mistresses, and adolescence is
almost wholly unrestrained. Such are the differences of
manners. Later, how many of these free maidens become
female slaves? I use the word in its least odious sense; I
mean that they are free in the development of their nature,
but slaves to duty.</p>

<p>Déruchette awoke every morning with little thought of her
actions of the day before. It would have troubled her a good
deal to have had to give an account of how she had spent her
time the previous week. All this, however, did not prevent
her having certain hours of strange disquietude; times when
some dark cloud seemed to pass over the brightness of her joy.
Those azure depths are subject to such shadows! But clouds
like these soon passed away. She quickly shook off such moods
with a cheerful laugh, knowing neither why she had been sad,
nor why she had regained her serenity. She was always at
play. As a child, she would take delight in teasing the passers-by.
She played practical jokes upon the boys. If the fiend
himself had passed that way, she would hardly have spared
him some ingenious trick. She was pretty and innocent; and
she could abuse the immunity accorded to such qualities. She
was ready with a smile, as a cat with a stroke of her claws. So
much the worse for the victim of her scratches. She thought
no more of them. Yesterday had no existence for her. She
lived in the fullness of to-day. Such it is to have too much
happiness fall to one's lot! With Déruchette impressions
vanished like the melted snow.</p>


