<h4>I</h4>

<h5>THE HAVELET NEAR THE CHURCH</h5>


<p>When there is a crowd at St. Sampson, St. Peter's Port is soon
deserted. A point of curiosity at a given place is like an air-pump.
News travel fast in small places. Going to see the
funnel of the Durande under Mess Lethierry's window had been,
since sunrise, the business of the Guernsey folks. Every other
event was eclipsed by this. The death of the Dean of St.
Asaph was forgotten, together with the question of the Rev. Mr.
Caudray, his sudden riches, and the departure of the <i>Cashmere</i>.
The machinery of the Durande brought back from the Douvres
rocks was the order of the day. People were incredulous. The
shipwreck had appeared extraordinary, the salvage seemed
impossible. Everybody hastened to assure himself of the truth
by the help of his own eyes. Business of every kind was suspended.
Long strings of townsfolk with their families, from
the "Vesin" up to the "Mess," men and women, gentlemen,
mothers with children, infants with dolls, were coming by
every road or pathway to see "the thing to be seen" at the
Bravées, turning their backs upon St. Peter's Port. Many
shops at St. Peter's Port were closed. In the Commercial
Arcade there was an absolute stagnation in buying and selling.
The Durande alone obtained attention. Not a single shopkeeper
had had a "handsell" that morning, except a jeweller,
who was surprised at having sold a wedding-ring to "a sort of
man who appeared in a great hurry, and who asked for the
house of the Dean." The shops which remained open were
centres of gossip, where loiterers discussed the miraculous
salvage. There was not a foot-passenger at the "Hyvreuse,"
which is known in these days, nobody knows why, as Cambridge
Park; no one was in the High Street, then called the Grande
Rue; nor in Smith Street, known then only as the Rue des
Forges; nobody in Hauteville. The Esplanade itself was
deserted. One might have guessed it to be Sunday. A visit
from a Royal personage to review the militia at the Ancresse
could not have emptied the town more completely. All this
hubbub about "a nobody" like Gilliatt, caused a good deal of
shrugging of the shoulders among persons of grave and correct
habits.</p>

<p>The church of St. Peter's Port, with its three gable-ends
placed side by side, its transept and its steeple, stands at the
water's side at the end of the harbour, and nearly on the landing
place itself, where it welcomes those who arrive, and gives
the departing "God speed." It represents the capital letter
at the beginning of that long line which forms the front of the
town towards the sea.</p>

<p>It is both the parish church of St. Peter's Port and the chief
place of the Deanery of the whole island. Its officiating minister
is the surrogate of the bishop, a clergyman in full orders.</p>

<p>The harbour of St. Peter's Port, a very fine and large port at
the present day, was at that epoch, and even up to ten years ago,
less considerable than the harbour of St. Sampson. It was enclosed
by two enormous thick walls, beginning at the water's
edge on both sides, and curving till they almost joined again at
the extremities, where there stood a little white lighthouse.
Under this lighthouse, a narrow gullet, bearing still the two
rings of the chain with which it was the custom to bar the
passage in ancient times, formed the entrance for vessels. The
harbour of St. Peter's Port might be well compared with the
claws of a huge lobster opened a little way. This kind of
pincers took from the ocean a portion of the sea, which it compelled
to remain calm. But during the easterly winds the
waves rolled heavily against the narrow entrance, the port was
agitated, and it was better not to enter. This is what had
happened with the <i>Cashmere</i> that day, which had accordingly
anchored in the roads.</p>

<p>The vessels, during the easterly winds, preferred this course,
which besides saved them the port dues. On these occasions
the boatmen of the town, a hardy race of mariners whom the
new port has thrown out of employment, came in their boats to
fetch passengers at the landing-place or at stations on the shore,
and carried them with their luggage, often in heavy seas, but
always without accident, to the vessels about to sail. The east
wind blows off the shore, and is very favourable for the passage
to England; the vessel at such times rolls, but does not pitch.</p>

<p>When a vessel happened to be in the port, everybody embarked
from the quay. When it was in the roads they took
their choice, and embarked from any point of the coast near
the moorings. The "Havelet" was one of these creeks. This
little harbour (which is the signification of the word) was near
the town, but was so solitary that it seemed far off. This solitude
was owing to the shelter of the high cliffs of Fort St. George,
which overlooked this retired inlet. The Havelet was accessible
by several paths. The most direct was along the water's side.
It had the advantage of leading to the town and to the church
in five minutes' walk, and the disadvantage of being covered by
the sea twice a day. The other paths were more or less abrupt,
and led down to the creek through gaps in the steep rocks.
Even in broad daylight, it was dusk in the Havelet. Huge
blocks overhanging it on all sides, and thick bushes and brambles
cast a sort of soft twilight upon the rocks and waves below.
Nothing could be more peaceful than this spot in calm weather;
nothing more tumultuous during heavy seas. There were ends
of branches there which were always wet with the foam. In
the spring time, the place was full of flowers, of nests, of perfumes,
of birds, of butterflies, and bees. Thanks to recent
improvements, this wild nook no longer exists. Fine, straight
lines have taken the place of these wild features; masonry,
quays, and little gardens, have made their appearance; earthwork
has been the rage, and taste has finally subdued the eccentricities
of the cliff, and the irregularities of the rocks below.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>II</h4>

<h5>DESPAIR CONFRONTS DESPAIR</h5>


<p>It was a little before ten o'clock in the morning. The crowd
at St. Sampson, according to all appearance, was increasing.
The multitude, feverish with curiosity, was moving towards the
north; and the Havelet, which is in the south, was more deserted
than ever.</p>

<p>Notwithstanding this, there was a boat there and a boatman.
In the boat was a travelling bag. The boatman seemed to be
waiting for some one.</p>

<p>The <i>Cashmere</i> was visible at anchor in roads, as she did not
start till midday; there was as yet no sign of moving aboard.</p>

<p>A passer-by, who had listened from one of the ladder-paths
up the cliffs overhead, would have heard a murmur of words in
the Havelet, and if he had leaned over the overhanging cliff
might have seen, at some distance from the boat, in a corner
among the rocks and branches, where the eye of the boatman
could not reach them, a man and a woman. It was Caudray
and Déruchette.</p>

<p>These obscure nooks on the seashore, the chosen places of
lady bathers, are not always so solitary as is believed. Persons
are sometimes observed and heard there. Those who seek
shelter and solitude in them may easily be followed through the
thick bushes, and, thanks to the multiplicity and entanglement
of the paths, the granite and the shrubs which favour the stolen
interview may also favour the witness.</p>

<p>Caudray and Déruchette stood face to face, looking into each
other's eyes, and holding each other by the hand. Déruchette
was speaking. Caudray was silent. A tear that had gathered
upon his eyelash hung there and did not fall.</p>

<p>Grief and strong passion were imprinted in his calm, religious
countenance. A painful resignation was there too—a resignation
hostile to faith, though springing from it. Upon that face,
simply devout until then, there was the commencement of a
fatal expression. He who had hitherto meditated only on
doctrine, had begun to meditate on Fate, an unhealthy meditation
for a priest. Faith dissolves under its action. Nothing
disturbs the religious mind more than that bending under the
weight of the unknown. Life seems a perpetual succession of
events, to which man submits. We never know from which
direction the sudden blow will come. Misery and happiness
enter or make their exit, like unexpected guests. Their laws,
their orbit, their principle of gravitation, are beyond man's
grasp. Virtue conducts not to happiness, nor crime to retribution:
conscience has one logic, fate another; and neither coincide.
Nothing is foreseen. We live confusedly, and from hand
to mouth. Conscience is the straight line, life is the whirlwind,
which creates above man's head either black chaos or the blue
sky. Fate does not practise the art of gradations. Her wheel
turns sometimes so fast that we can scarcely distinguish the
interval between one revolution and another, or the link between
yesterday and to-day. Caudray was a believer whose faith did
not exclude reason, and whose priestly training did not shut
him out from passion. Those religious systems which impose
celibacy on the priesthood are not without reason for it.
Nothing really destroys the individuality of the priest more
than love. All sorts of clouds seemed to darken Caudray's
soul. He looked too long into Déruchette's eyes. These two
beings worshipped each other.</p>

<p>There was in Caudray's eye the mute adoration of despair.</p>

<p>Déruchette spoke.</p>

<p>"You must not leave me. I shall not have strength. I
thought I could bid you farewell. I cannot. Why did you
come yesterday? You should not have come if you were going
so soon. I never spoke to you. I loved you; but knew it not.
Only that day, when M. Hérode read to us the story of Rebecca,
and when your eyes met mine, my cheeks were like fire, and I
thought only of how Rebecca's face must have burnt like mine;
and yet, if any one had told me yesterday that I loved you, I
might have laughed at it. This is what is so terrible. It has
been like a treason. I did not take heed. I went to the church,
I saw you, I thought everybody there was like myself. I do not
reproach you; you did nothing to make me love you; you did
nothing but look at me; it is not your fault if you look at
people; and yet that made me love you so much. I did not
even suspect it. When you took up the book it was a flood of
light; when others took it, it was but a book. You raised your
eyes sometimes; you spoke of archangels; oh! you were my
archangel. What you said penetrated my thoughts at once.
Before then, I know not even whether I believed in God. Since
I have known you, I have learnt to pray. I used to say to
Douce, dress me quickly, lest I should be late at the service; and
I hastened to the church. Such it was with me to love some
one. I did not know the cause. I said to myself, how devout
I am becoming. It is from you that I have learnt that I do
not go to church for God's service. It is true; I went for your
sake. You spoke so well, and when you raised your arms to
heaven, you seemed to hold my heart within your two white
hands. I was foolish; but I did not know it. Shall I tell you
your fault? It was your coming to me in the garden; it was
your speaking to me. If you had said nothing, I should have
known nothing. If you had gone, I should, perhaps, have been
sad, but now I should die. Since I know that I love you, you
cannot leave me. Of what are you thinking? You do not
seem to listen to me."</p>

<p>Caudray replied:</p>

<p>"You heard what was said last night?"</p>

<p>"Ah, me!"</p>

<p>"What can I do against that?"</p>

<p>They were silent for a moment. Caudray continued:</p>

<p>"There is but one duty left to me. It is to depart."</p>

<p>"And mine to die. Oh! how I wish there was no sea, but
only sky. It seems to me as if that would settle all, and that
our departure would be the same. It was wrong to speak to
me; why did you speak to me? Do not go. What will
become of me? I tell you I shall die. You will be far off when
I shall be in my grave. Oh! my heart will break. I am very
wretched; yet my uncle is not unkind."</p>

<p>It was the first time in her life that Déruchette had ever said
"my uncle." Until then she had always said "my father."</p>

<p>Caudray stepped back, and made a sign to the boatman.
Déruchette heard the sound of the boat-hook among the shingle,
and the step of the man on the gunwale of the boat.</p>

<p>"No! no!" cried Déruchette.</p>

<p>"It must be, Déruchette," replied Caudray.</p>

<p>"No! never! For the sake of an engine—impossible. Did
you see that horrible man last night? You cannot abandon
me thus. You are wise; you can find a means. It is impossible
that you bade me come here this morning with the idea of
leaving me. I have never done anything to deserve this; you
can have no reproach to make me. Is it by that vessel that
you intended to sail? I will not let you go. You shall not
leave me. Heaven does not open thus to close so soon. I know
you will remain. Besides, it is not yet time. Oh! how I love
you."</p>

<p>And pressing closely to him, she interlaced the fingers of each
hand behind his neck, as if partly to make a bond of her two
arms for detaining him, and partly with her joined hands to
pray. He moved away this gentle restraint, while Déruchette
resisted as long as she could.</p>

<p>Déruchette sank upon a projection of the rock covered with
ivy, lifting by an unconscious movement the sleeve of her dress
up to the elbow, and exhibiting her graceful arm. A pale
suffused light was in her eyes. The boat was approaching.</p>

<p>Caudray held her head between his hands. He touched her
hair with a sort of religious care, fixed his eyes upon her for
some moments, then kissed her on the forehead fervently, and
in an accent trembling with anguish, and in which might have
been traced the uprooting of his soul, he uttered the word
which has so often resounded in the depths of the human heart,
"Farewell!"</p>

<p>Déruchette burst into loud sobs.</p>

<p>At this moment they heard a voice near them, which said
solemnly and deliberately:</p>

<p>"Why should you not be man and wife?"</p>

<p>Caudray raised his head. Déruchette looked up.</p>

<p>Gilliatt stood before them.</p>

<p>He had approached by a bye-path.</p>

<p>He was no longer the same man that he had appeared on the
previous night. He had arranged his hair, shaved his beard,
put on shoes, and a white shirt, with a large collar turned over,
sailor fashion. He wore a sailor's costume, but all was new. A
gold ring was on his little finger. He seemed profoundly calm.
His sunburnt skin had become pale: a hue of sickly bronze
overspread it.</p>

<p>They looked at him astonished. Though so changed,
Déruchette recognised him. But the words which he had
spoken were so far from what was passing in their minds at
that moment, that they had left no distinct impression.</p>

<p>Gilliatt spoke again:</p>

<p>"Why should you say farewell? Be man and wife, and go
together."</p>

<p>Déruchette started. A trembling seized her from head to
foot.</p>

<p>Gilliatt continued:</p>

<p>"Miss Lethierry is a woman. She is of age. It depends
only on herself. Her uncle is but her uncle. You love each
other——"</p>

<p>Déruchette interrupted in a gentle voice, and asked, "How
came you here?"</p>

<p>"Make yourselves one," repeated Gilliatt.</p>

<p>Déruchette began to have a sense of the meaning of his
words. She stammered out:</p>

<p>"My poor uncle!"</p>

<p>"If the marriage was yet to be," said Gilliatt, "he would
refuse. When it is over he will consent. Besides, you are going
to leave here. When you return he will forgive."</p>

<p>Gilliatt added, with a slight touch of bitterness, "And then
he is thinking of nothing just now but the rebuilding of his
boat. This will occupy his mind during your absence. The
Durande will console him."</p>

<p>"I cannot," said Déruchette, in a state of stupor which was
not without its gleam of joy. "I must not leave him unhappy."</p>

<p>"It will be but for a short time," answered Gilliatt.</p>

<p>Caudray and Déruchette had been, as it were, bewildered.
They recovered themselves now. The meaning of Gilliatt's
words became plainer as their surprise diminished. There was
a slight cloud still before them; but their part was not to resist.
We yield easily to those who come to save. Objections to a
return into Paradise are weak. There was something in the
attitude of Déruchette, as she leaned imperceptibly upon her
lover, which seemed to make common cause with Gilliatt's
words. The enigma of the presence of this man, and of his
utterances, which, in the mind of Déruchette in particular,
produced various kinds of astonishment, was a thing apart. He
said to them, "Be man and wife!" This was clear; if there
was responsibility, it was his. Déruchette had a confused feeling
that, for many reasons, he had the right to decide upon her
fate. Caudray murmured, as if plunged in thought, "An uncle
is not a father."</p>

<p>His resolution was corrupted by the sudden and happy turn
in his ideas. The probable scruples of the clergyman melted,
and dissolved in his heart's love for Déruchette.</p>

<p>Gilliatt's tone became abrupt and harsh, and like the pulsations
of fever.</p>

<p>"There must be no delay," he said. "You have time, but
that is all. Come."</p>

<p>Caudray observed him attentively; and suddenly exclaimed:</p>

<p>"I recognise you. It was you who saved my life."</p>

<p>Gilliatt replied:</p>

<p>"I think not."</p>

<p>"Yonder," said Caudray, "at the extremity of the
Banques."</p>

<p>"I do not know the place," said Gilliatt.</p>

<p>"It was on the very day that I arrived here."</p>

<p>"Let us lose no time," interrupted Gilliatt.</p>

<p>"And if I am not deceived, you are the man whom we met
last night."</p>

<p>"Perhaps."</p>

<p>"What is your name?"</p>

<p>Gilliatt raised his voice:</p>

<p>"Boatman! wait there for us. We shall return soon. You
asked me, Miss Lethierry, how I came to be here. The answer
is very simple. I walked behind you. You are twenty-one.
In this country, when persons are of age, and depend only on
themselves, they may be married immediately. Let us take
the path along the water-side. It is passable; the tide will not
rise here till noon. But lose no time. Come with me."</p>

<p>Déruchette and Caudray seemed to consult each other by a
glance. They were standing close together motionless. They
were intoxicated with joy. There are strange hesitations sometimes
on the edge of the abyss of happiness. They understood,
as it were, without understanding.</p>

<p>"His name is Gilliatt," whispered Déruchette.</p>

<p>Gilliatt interrupted them with a sort of tone of authority.</p>

<p>"What do you linger for?" he asked. "I tell you to follow
me."</p>

<p>"Whither?" asked Caudray.</p>

<p>"There!"</p>

<p>And Gilliatt pointed with his finger towards the spire of the
church.</p>

<p>Gilliatt walked on before, and they followed him. His step
was firm; but they walked unsteadily.</p>

<p>As they approached the church, an expression dawned upon
those two pure and beautiful countenances, which was soon to
become a smile. The approach to the church lighted them up.
In the hollow eyes of Gilliatt there was the darkness of night.
The beholder might have imagined that he saw a spectre leading
two souls to Paradise.</p>

<p>Caudray and Déruchette scarcely took count of what had
happened. The interposition of this man was like the branch
clutched at by the drowning. They followed their guide with
the docility of despair, leaning on the first comer. Those who
feel themselves near death easily accept the accident which
seems to save. Déruchette, more ignorant of life, was more
confident. Caudray was thoughtful. Déruchette was of age,
it was true. The English formalities of marriage are simple,
especially in primitive parts, where the clergyman has almost a
discretionary power; but would the Dean consent to celebrate
the marriage without even inquiring whether the uncle consented?
This was the question. Nevertheless, they could
learn. In any case there would be but a delay.</p>

<p>But what was this man? and if it was really he whom
Lethierry the night before had declared should be his son-in-law,
what could be the meaning of his actions? The very
obstacle itself had become a providence. Caudray yielded; but
his yielding was only the rapid and tacit assent of a man who
feels himself saved from despair.</p>

<p>The pathway was uneven, and sometimes wet and difficult to
pass. Caudray, absorbed in thought, did not observe the
occasional pools of water or the heaps of shingle. But from
time to time Gilliatt turned and said to him, "Take heed of
those stones. Give her your hand."</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>III</h4>

<h5>THE FORETHOUGHT OF SELF-SACRIFICE</h5>


<p>It struck ten as they entered the church.</p>

<p>By reason of the early hour, and also on account of the desertion
of the town that day, the church was empty.</p>

<p>At the farther end, however, near the table which in the reformed
church fulfils the place of the altar, there were three
persons. They were the Dean, his evangelist, and the registrar.
The Dean, who was the Reverend Jaquemin Hérode, was
seated; the evangelist and the registrar stood beside him.</p>

<p>A book was open upon the table.</p>

<p>Beside him, upon a credence-table, was another book. It
was the parish register, and also open; and an attentive eye
might have remarked a page on which was some writing, of
which the ink was not yet dry. By the side of the register were
a pen and a writing-desk.</p>

<p>The Reverend Jaquemin Hérode rose on perceiving Caudray.</p>

<p>"I have been expecting you," he said. "All is ready."</p>

<p>The Dean, in fact, wore his officiating robes.</p>

<p>Caudray looked towards Gilliatt.</p>

<p>The Reverend Doctor added, "I am at your service, brother;"
and he bowed.</p>

<p>It was a bow which neither turned to right or left. It was
evident from the direction of the Dean's gaze that he did not
recognise the existence of any one but Caudray, for Caudray
was a clergyman and a gentleman. Neither Déruchette, who
stood aside, nor Gilliatt, who was in the rear, were included in
the salutation. His look was a sort of parenthesis in which
none but Caudray were admitted. The observance of these
little niceties constitutes an important feature in the maintenance
of order and the preservation of society.</p>

<p>The Dean continued, with a graceful and dignified urbanity:</p>

<p>"I congratulate you, my colleague, from a double point of
view. You have lost your uncle, and are about to take a wife;
you are blessed with riches on the one hand, and happiness on
the other. Moreover, thanks to the boat which they are about
to rebuild, Mess Lethierry will also be rich; which is as it should
be. Miss Lethierry was born in this parish; I have verified the
date of her birth in the register. She is of age, and at her own
disposal. Her uncle, too, who is her only relative, consents.
You are anxious to be united immediately on account of your
approaching departure. This I can understand; but this
being the marriage of the rector of the parish, I should have
been gratified to have seen it associated with a little more
solemnity. I will consult your wishes by not detaining you
longer than necessary. The essentials will be soon complied
with. The form is already drawn up in the register, and it
requires only the names to be filled in. By the terms of the law
and custom, the marriage may be celebrated immediately after
the inscription. The declaration necessary for the licence has
been duly made. I take upon myself a slight irregularity; for
the application for the licence ought to have been registered
seven days in advance; but I yield to necessity and the urgency
of your departure. Be it so, then. I will proceed with the
ceremony. My evangelist will be the witness for the bridegroom;
as regards the witness for the bride——"</p>

<p>The Dean turned towards Gilliatt. Gilliatt made a movement
of his head.</p>

<p>"That is sufficient," said the Dean.</p>

<p>Caudray remained motionless; Déruchette was happy, but
no less powerless to move.</p>

<p>"Nevertheless," continued the Dean, "there is still an
obstacle."</p>

<p>Déruchette started.</p>

<p>The Dean continued:</p>

<p>"The representative here present of Mess Lethierry applied
for the licence for you, and has signed the declaration on the
register." And with the thumb of his left hand the Dean
pointed to Gilliatt, which prevented the necessity of his remembering
his name. "The messenger from Mess Lethierry," he
added, "has informed me this morning that being too much
occupied to come in person, Mess Lethierry desired that the
marriage should take place immediately. This desire, expressed
verbally, is not sufficient. In consequence of having to grant
the licence, and of the irregularity which I take upon myself, I
cannot proceed so rapidly without informing myself from Mess
Lethierry personally, unless some one can produce his signature.
Whatever might be my desire to serve you, I cannot be satisfied
with a mere message. I must have some written document."</p>

<p>"That need not delay us," said Gilliatt. And he presented
a paper to the Dean. The Dean took it, perused it by a glance,
seemed to pass over some lines as unimportant, and read aloud:
"Go to the Dean for the licence. I wish the marriage to take
place as soon as possible. Immediately would be better."</p>

<p>He placed the paper on the table, and proceeded:</p>

<p>"It is signed, Lethierry. It would have been more respectful
to have addressed himself to me. But since I am called on to
serve a colleague, I ask no more."</p>

<p>Caudray glanced again at Gilliatt. There are moments when
mind and mind comprehend each other. Caudray felt that
there was some deception; he had not the strength of purpose,
perhaps he had not the idea of revealing it. Whether in
obedience to a latent heroism, of which he had begun to obtain
a glimpse; or whether from a deadening of the conscience,
arising from the suddenness of the happiness placed within his
reach, he uttered no word.</p>

<p>The Dean took the pen, and aided by the clerk, filled up the
spaces in the page of the register; then he rose, and by a gesture
invited Caudray and Déruchette to approach the table.</p>

<p>The ceremony commenced. It was a strange moment.
Caudray and Déruchette stood beside each other before the
minister. He who has ever dreamed of a marriage in which
he himself was chief actor, may conceive something of the feeling
which they experienced.</p>

<p>Gilliatt stood at a little distance in the shadow of the pillars.</p>

<p>Déruchette, on rising in the morning, desperate, thinking only
of death and its associations, had dressed herself in white. Her
attire, which had been associated in her mind with mourning,
was suited to her nuptials. A white dress is all that is necessary
for the bride.</p>

<p>A ray of happiness was visible upon her face. Never had she
appeared more beautiful. Her features were remarkable for
prettiness rather than what is called beauty. Their fault, if
fault it be, lay in a certain excess of grace. Déruchette in
repose, that is, neither disturbed by passion or grief, was graceful
above all. The ideal virgin is the transfiguration of a face like
this. Déruchette, touched by her sorrow and her love, seemed
to have caught that higher and more holy expression. It was
the difference between the field daisy and the lily.</p>

<p>The tears had scarcely dried upon her cheeks; one perhaps
still lingered in the midst of her smiles. Traces of tears indistinctly
visible form a pleasing but sombre accompaniment of joy.</p>

<p>The Dean, standing near the table, placed his finger upon the
open book, and asked in a distinct voice whether they knew
of any impediment to their union.</p>

<p>There was no reply.</p>

<p>"Amen!" said the Dean.</p>

<p>Caudray and Déruchette advanced a step or two towards the
table.</p>

<p>"Joseph Ebenezer Caudray, wilt thou have this woman to
be thy wedded wife?"</p>

<p>Caudray replied "I will."</p>

<p>The Dean continued:</p>

<p>"Durande Déruchette Lethierry, wilt thou have this man to
be thy wedded husband?"</p>

<p>Déruchette, in an agony of soul, springing from her excess of
happiness, murmured rather than uttered—</p>

<p>"I will."</p>

<p>Then followed the beautiful form of the Anglican marriage
service. The Dean looked around, and in the twilight of the
church uttered the solemn words:</p>

<p>"Who giveth this woman to be married to this man?"</p>

<p>Gilliatt answered, "I do!"</p>

<p>There was an interval of silence. Caudray and Déruchette
felt a vague sense of oppression in spite of their joy.</p>

<p>The Dean placed Déruchette's right hand in Caudray's; and
Caudray repeated after him:</p>

<p>"I take thee, Durande Déruchette to be my wedded wife, for
better for worse, for richer for poorer, in sickness and in health,
to love and to cherish till death do us part; and thereto I plight
thee my troth."</p>

<p>The Dean then placed Caudray's right hand in that of Déruchette,
and Déruchette said after him:</p>

<p>"I take thee to be my wedded husband for better for worse,
for richer for poorer, in sickness or in health, to love and to
cherish till death do us part; and thereto I plight thee my
troth."</p>

<p>The Dean asked, "Where is the ring?" The question took
them by surprise. Caudray had no ring; but Gilliatt took off
the gold ring which he wore upon his little finger. It was probably
the wedding-ring which had been sold that morning by
the jeweller in the Commercial Arcade.</p>

<p>The Dean placed the ring upon the book; then handed it
to Caudray, who took Déruchette's little trembling left hand,
passed the ring over her fourth finger, and said:</p>

<p>"With this ring I thee wed!"</p>

<p>"In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost," continued the Dean.</p>

<p>"Amen," said his evangelist.</p>

<p>Then the Dean said, "Let us pray."</p>

<p>Caudray and Déruchette turned towards the table, and knelt
down.</p>

<p>Gilliatt, standing by, inclined his head.</p>

<p>So they knelt before God; while he seemed to bend under the
burden of his fate.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>IV</h4>

<h5>FOR YOUR WIFE: WHEN YOU MARRY</h5>


<p>As they left the church they could see the <i>Cashmere</i> making
preparations for her departure.</p>

<p>"You are in time," said Gilliatt.</p>

<p>They chose again the path leading to the Havelet.</p>

<p>Caudray and Déruchette went before, Gilliatt this time
walking behind them. They were two somnambulists. Their
bewilderment had not passed away, but only changed in form.
They took no heed of whither they were going, or of what they
did. They hurried on mechanically, scarcely remembering the
existence of anything, feeling that they were united for ever,
but scarcely able to connect two ideas in their minds. In
ecstasy like theirs it is as impossible to think as it is to swim in
a torrent. In the midst of their trouble and darkness they had
been plunged in a whirlpool of delight; they bore a paradise
within themselves. They did not speak, but conversed with
each other by the mysterious sympathy of their souls. Déruchette
pressed Caudray's arm to her side.</p>

<p>The footsteps of Gilliatt behind them reminded them now
and then that he was there. They were deeply moved, but
could find no words. The excess of emotion results in stupor.
Theirs was delightful, but overwhelming. They were man and
wife: every other idea was postponed to that. What Gilliatt
had done was well; that was all that they could grasp. They
experienced towards their guide a deep but vague gratitude in
their hearts. Déruchette felt that there was some mystery to
be explained, but not now. Meanwhile they accepted their
unexpected happiness. They felt themselves controlled by the
abruptness and decision of this man who conferred on them so
much happiness with a kind of authority. To question him,
to talk with him seemed impossible. Too many impressions
rushed into their minds at once for that. Their absorption was
pardonable.</p>

<p>Events succeed each other sometimes with the rapidity of
hailstones. Their effect is overpowering; they deaden the
senses. Falling upon existences habitually calm, they render
incidents rapidly unintelligible even to those whom they chiefly
concern; we become scarcely conscious of our own adventures;
we are overwhelmed without guessing the cause, or crowned
with happiness without comprehending it. For some hours
Déruchette had been subjected to every kind of emotion: at
first, surprise and delight at meeting Caudray in the garden;
then horror at the monster whom her uncle had presented as her
husband; then her anguish when the angel of her dreams spread
his wings and seemed about to depart; and now her joy, a joy
such as she had never known before, founded on an inexplicable
enigma; the monster of last night himself restoring her lover;
marriage arising out of her torture; this Gilliatt, the evil
destiny of last night, become to-day her saviour! She could
explain nothing to her own mind. It was evident that all the
morning Gilliatt had had no other occupation than that of preparing
the way for their marriage: he had done all: he had
answered for Mess Lethierry, seen the Dean, obtained the
licence, signed the necessary declaration; and thus the marriage
had been rendered possible. But Déruchette understood it not.
If she had, she could not have comprehended the reasons.
They did nothing but close their eyes to the world, and—grateful
in their hearts—yield themselves up to the guidance of this
good demon. There was no time for explanations, and expressions
of gratitude seemed too insignificant. They were silent
in their trance of love.</p>

<p>The little power of thought which they retained was scarcely
more than sufficient to guide them on their way—to enable
them to distinguish the sea from the land, and the <i>Cashmere</i>
from every other vessel.</p>

<p>In a few minutes they were at the little creek.</p>

<p>Caudray entered the boat first. At the moment when
Déruchette was about to follow, she felt her sleeve held gently.
It was Gilliatt, who had placed his finger upon a fold of her
dress.</p>

<p>"Madam," he said, "you are going on a journey unexpectedly.
It has struck me that you would have need of dresses and
clothes. You will find a trunk aboard the <i>Cashmere</i>, containing
a lady's clothing. It came to me from my mother. It was
intended for my wife if I should marry. Permit me to ask your
acceptance of it."</p>

<p>Déruchette, partially aroused from her dream, turned towards
him. Gilliatt continued, in a voice which was scarcely audible:</p>

<p>"I do not wish to detain you, madam, but I feel that I ought
to give you some explanation. On the day of your misfortune,
you were sitting in the lower room; you uttered certain words;
it is easy to understand that you have forgotten them. We
are not compelled to remember every word we speak. Mess
Lethierry was in great sorrow. It was certainly a noble vessel,
and one that did good service. The misfortune was recent;
there was a great commotion. Those are things which one
naturally forgets. It was only a vessel wrecked among the
rocks; one cannot be always thinking of an accident. But
what I wished to tell you was, that as it was said that no one
would go, I went. They said it was impossible; but it was not.
I thank you for listening to me a moment. You can understand,
madam, that if I went there, it was not with the thought
of displeasing you. This is a thing, besides, of old date. I
know that you are in haste. If there was time, if we could talk
about this, you might perhaps remember. But this is all useless
now. The history of it goes back to a day when there was
snow upon the ground. And then on one occasion that I passed
you, I thought that you looked kindly on me. This is how it
was. With regard to last night, I had not had time to go to
my home. I came from my labour; I was all torn and ragged;
I startled you, and you fainted. I was to blame; people do not
come like that to strangers' houses; I ask your forgiveness.
This is nearly all I had to say. You are about to sail. You
will have fine weather; the wind is in the east. Farewell.
You will not blame me for troubling you with these things.
This is the last minute."</p>

<p>"I am thinking of the trunk you spoke of," replied Déruchette.
"Why do you not keep it for your wife, when you marry?"</p>

<p>"It is most likely, madam," replied Gilliatt, "that I shall
never marry."</p>

<p>"That would be a pity," said Déruchette; "you are so good."</p>

<p>And Déruchette smiled. Gilliatt returned her smile.</p>

<p>Then he assisted her to step into the boat.</p>

<p>In less than a quarter of an hour afterwards Caudray and
Déruchette were aboard the <i>Cashmere</i> in the roads.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>V</h4>

<h5>THE GREAT TOMB</h5>


<p>Gilliatt walked along the water-side, passed rapidly through
St. Peter's Port, and then turned towards St. Sampson by the
seashore. In his anxiety to meet no one whom he knew, he
avoided the highways now filled with foot-passengers by his
great achievement.</p>

<p>For a long time, as the reader knows, he had had a peculiar
manner of traversing the country in all parts without being
observed. He knew the bye-paths, and favoured solitary and
winding routes; he had the shy habits of a wild beast who
knows that he is disliked, and keeps at a distance. When
quite a child, he had been quick to feel how little welcome men
showed in their faces at his approach, and he had gradually contracted
that habit of being alone which had since become an
instinct.</p>

<p>He passed through the Esplanade, then by the Salerie. Now
and then he turned and looked behind him at the <i>Cashmere</i> in
the roads, which was beginning to set her sails. There was
little wind; Gilliatt went faster than the <i>Cashmere</i>. He walked
with downcast eyes among the lower rocks at the water's edge.
The tide was beginning to rise.</p>

<p>Suddenly he stopped, and, turning his back, contemplated
for some minutes a group of oaks beyond the rocks which concealed
the road to Vale. They were the oaks at the spot called
the Basses Maisons. It was there that Déruchette once wrote
with her finger the name of Gilliatt in the snow. Many a day
had passed since that snow had melted away.</p>

<p>Then he pursued his way.</p>

<p>The day was beautiful; more beautiful than any that had
yet been seen that year. It was one of those spring days when
May suddenly pours forth all its beauty, and when nature seems
to have no thought but to rejoice and be happy. Amidst the
many murmurs from forest and village, from the sea and the
air, a sound of cooing could be distinguished. The first butterflies
of the year were resting on the early roses. Everything in
nature seemed new—the grass, the mosses, the leaves, the
perfumes, the rays of light. The sun shone as if it had never
shone before. The pebbles seemed bathed in coolness. Birds
but lately fledged sang out their deep notes from the trees, or
fluttered among the boughs in their attempts to use their new-found
wings. There was a chattering all together of goldfinches,
pewits, tomtits, woodpeckers, bullfinches, and thrushes.
The blossoms of lilacs, May lilies, daphnes, and melilots mingled
their various hues in the thickets. A beautiful kind of water-weed
peculiar to Guernsey covered the pools with an emerald
green; where the kingfishers and the water-wagtails, which
make such graceful little nests, came down to bathe their
wings. Through every opening in the branches appeared the
deep blue sky. A few lazy clouds followed each other in the
azure depths. The ear seemed to catch the sound of kisses
sent from invisible lips. Every old wall had its tufts of wallflowers.
The plum-trees and laburnums were in blossom; their
white and yellow masses gleamed through the interlacing
boughs. The spring showered all her gold and silver on the
woods. The new shoots and leaves were green and fresh.
Calls of welcome were in the air; the approaching summer
opened her hospitable doors for birds coming from afar. It
was the time of the arrival of the swallows. The clusters of
furze-bushes bordered the steep sides of hollow roads in anticipation
of the clusters of the hawthorn. The pretty and the
beautiful reigned side by side; the magnificent and the graceful,
the great and the little, had each their place. No note in the
great concert of nature was lost. Green microscopic beauties
took their place in the vast universal plan in which all seemed
distinguishable as in limpid water. Everywhere a divine fulness,
a mysterious sense of expansion, suggested the unseen
effort of the sap in movement. Guttering things glittered more
than ever; loving natures became more tender. There was a
hymn in the flowers, and a radiance in the sounds of the air.
The wide-diffused harmony of nature burst forth on every side.
All things which felt the dawn of life invited others to put forth
shoots. A movement coming from below, and also from above,
stirred vaguely all hearts susceptible to the scattered and subterranean
influence of germination. The flower shadowed forth
the fruit; young maidens dreamed of love. It was nature's
universal bridal. It was fine, bright, and warm; through the
hedges in the meadows children were seen laughing and playing
at their games. The fruit-trees filled the orchards with their
heaps of white and pink blossom. In the fields were primroses,
cowslips, milfoil, daffodils, daisies, speedwell, jacinths, and
violets. Blue borage and yellow irises swarmed with those
beautiful little pink stars which flower always in groups, and
are hence called "companions." Creatures with golden scales
glided between the stones. The flowering houseleek covered
the thatched roofs with purple patches. Women were plaiting
hives in the open air; and the bees were abroad, mingling their
humming with the murmurs from the sea. Nature, sensitive
to the touch of spring, exhaled delight.</p>

<p>When Gilliatt arrived at St. Sampson, the water had not yet
risen at the further end of the harbour, and he was able to cross
it dry-footed unperceived behind the hulls of vessels fixed for
repair. A number of flat stones were placed there at regular
distances to make a causeway.</p>

<p>He was not observed. The crowd was at the other end of
the port, near the narrow entrance, by the Bravées. There his
name was in every mouth. They were, in fact, speaking about
him so much that none paid attention to him. He passed,
sheltered in some degree by the very commotion that he had
caused.</p>

<p>He saw from afar the sloop in the place where he had moored
it, with the funnel standing between its four chains; observed
a movement of carpenters at their work, and confused outlines
of figures passing to and fro; and he could distinguish the loud
and cheery voice of Mess Lethierry giving orders.</p>

<p>He threaded the narrow alleys behind the Bravées. There
was no one there beside him. All curiosity was concentrated
on the front of the house. He chose the footpath alongside the
low wall of the garden, but stopped at the angle where the wild
mallow grew. He saw once more the stone where he used to
pass his time; saw once more the wooden garden seat where
Déruchette was accustomed to sit, and glanced again at the
pathway of the alley where he had seen the embrace of two
shadows which had vanished.</p>

<p>He soon went on his way, climbed the hill of Vale Castle,
descended again, and directed his steps towards the Bû de la Rue.</p>

<p>The Houmet-Paradis was a solitude.</p>

<p>His house was in the same state in which he had left it in the
morning, after dressing himself to go to St. Peter's Port.</p>

<p>A window was open, through which his bagpipe might have
been seen hanging to a nail upon the wall.</p>

<p>Upon the table was the little Bible given to him in token of
gratitude by the stranger whom he now knew as Caudray.</p>

<p>The key was in the door. He approached; placed his hand
upon it; turned it twice in the lock, put the key in his pocket,
and departed.</p>

<p>He walked not in the direction of the town, but towards the
sea.</p>

<p>He traversed his garden diagonally, taking the shortest way
without regard to the beds, but taking care not to tread upon
the plants which he placed there, because he had heard that
they were favourites with Déruchette.</p>

<p>He crossed the parapet wall, and let himself down upon the
rocks.</p>

<p>Going straight on, he began to follow the long ridge of rocks
which connected the Bû de la Rue with the great natural obelisk
of granite rising erect from the sea, which was known as the
Beast's Horn. This was the place of the Gild-Holm-'Ur
seat.</p>

<p>He strode on from block to block like a giant among mountains.
To make long strides upon a row of breakers is like
walking upon the ridge of a roof.</p>

<p>A fisherwoman with dredge-nets, who had been walking
naked-footed among the pools of sea-water at some distance,
and had just regained the shore, called to him, "Take care; the
tide is coming." But he held on his way.</p>

<p>Having arrived at the great rock of the point, the Horn,
which rises like a pinnacle from the sea, he stopped. It was
the extremity of the promontory.</p>

<p>He looked around.</p>

<p>Out at sea a few sailing boats at anchor were fishing. Now
and then rivulets of silver glittered among them in the sun: it
was the water running from the nets. The <i>Cashmere</i> was not
yet off St. Sampson. She had set her main-topsail, and was
between Herm and Jethou.</p>

<p>Gilliatt rounded the rock, and came under the Gild-Holm-'Ur
seat, at the foot of that kind of abrupt stairs where, less than
three months before, he had assisted Caudray to come down.
He ascended.</p>

<p>The greater number of the steps were already under water.
Two or three only were still dry, by which he climbed.</p>

<p>The steps led up to the Gild-Holm-'Ur seat. He reached the
niche, contemplated it for a moment, pressed his hand upon his
eyes, and let it glide gently from one eyelid to the other—a
gesture by which he seemed to obliterate the memory of the
past—then sat down in the hollow, with the perpendicular wall
behind him, and the ocean at his feet.</p>

<p>The <i>Cashmere</i> at that moment was passing the great round
half-submerged tower, defended by one sergeant and a cannon,
which marks the half way in the roads between Herm and St.
Peter's Port.</p>

<p>A few flowers stirred among the crevices in the rock about
Gilliatt's head. The sea was blue as far as eye could reach.
The wind came from the east; there was a little surf in the
direction of the island of Sark, of which only the western side
is visible from Guernsey. In the distance appeared the coast
of France like a mist, with the long yellow strips of sand about
Carteret. Now and then a white butterfly fluttered by. The
butterflies frequently fly out to sea.</p>

<p>The breeze was very slight. The blue expanse, both above
and below, was tranquil. Not a ripple agitated those species
of serpents, of an azure more or less dark, which indicate on the
surface of the sea the lines of sunken rocks.</p>

<p>The <i>Cashmere</i>, little moved by the wind, had set her topsail
and studding-sails to catch the breeze. All her canvas was
spread, but the wind being a side one, her studding-sails only
compelled her to hug the Guernsey coast more closely. She
had passed the beacon of St. Sampson, and was off the hill of
Vale Castle. The moment was approaching when she would
double the point of the Bû de la Rue.</p>

<p>Gilliatt watched her approach.</p>

<p>The air and sea were still. The tide rose not by waves, but
by an imperceptible swell. The level of the water crept upward
without a palpitation. The subdued murmur from the
open sea was soft as the breathing of a child.</p>

<p>In the direction of the harbour of St. Sampson, faint echoes
could be heard of carpenters' hammers. The carpenters were
probably the workmen constructing the tackle, gear, and
apparatus for removing the engine from the sloop. The sounds,
however, scarcely reached Gilliatt by reason of the mass of
granite at his back.</p>

<p>The <i>Cashmere</i> approached with the slowness of a phantom.</p>

<p>Gilliatt watched it still.</p>

<p>Suddenly a touch and a sensation of cold caused him to look
down. The sea had reached his feet.</p>

<p>He lowered his eyes, then raised them again.</p>

<p>The <i>Cashmere</i> was quite near.</p>

<p>The rock in which the rains had hollowed out the Gild-Holm-'Ur
seat was so completely vertical, and there was so much
water at its base, that in calm weather vessels were able to pass
without danger within a few cables' lengths.</p>

<p>The <i>Cashmere</i> was abreast of the rock. It rose straight upwards
as if it had grown out of the water; or like the lengthening
out of a shadow. The rigging showed black against the heavens
and in the magnificent expanse of the sea. The long sails, passing
for a moment over the sun, became lighted up with a singular
glory and transparence. The water murmured indistinctly;
but no other noise marked the majestic gliding of that outline.
The deck was as visible as if he had stood upon it.</p>

<p>The steersman was at the helm; a cabin-boy was climbing
the shrouds; a few passengers leaning on the bulwarks were
contemplating the beauty of the scene. The captain was
smoking; but nothing of all this was seen by Gilliatt.</p>

<p>There was a spot on the deck on which the broad sunlight
fell. It was on this corner that his eyes were fixed. In this
sunlight were Déruchette and Caudray. They were sitting
together side by side, like two birds, warming themselves in the
noonday sun, upon one of those covered seats with a little
awning which well-ordered packet-boats provided for passengers,
and upon which was the inscription, when it happened to be an
English vessel, "For ladies only." Déruchette's head was
leaning upon Caudray's shoulder; his arm was around her
waist; they held each other's hands with their fingers interwoven.
A celestial light was discernible in those two faces
formed by innocence. Their chaste embrace was expressive of
their earthly union and their purity of soul. The seat was a
sort of alcove, almost a nest; it was at the same time a glory
round them; the tender aureola of love passing into a cloud.</p>

<p>The silence was like the calm of heaven.</p>

<p>Caudray's gaze was fixed in contemplation. Déruchette's
lips moved; and, amidst that perfect silence, as the wind carried
the vessel near shore, and it glided within a few fathoms of the
Gild-Holm-'Ur seat, Gilliatt heard the tender and musical voice
of Déruchette exclaiming:</p>

<p>"Look yonder. It seems as if there were a man upon the
rock."</p>

<p>The vessel passed.</p>

<p>Leaving the promontory of the Bû de la Rue behind, the
<i>Cashmere</i> glided on upon the waters. In less than a quarter of
an hour, her masts and sails formed only a white obelisk, gradually
decreasing against the horizon. Gilliatt felt that the water
had reached his knees.</p>

<p>He contemplated the vessel speeding on her way.</p>

<p>The breeze freshened out at sea. He could see the <i>Cashmere</i>
run out her lower studding-sails and her staysails, to take
advantage of the rising wind. She was already clear of the
waters of Guernsey. Gilliatt followed the vessel with his eyes.</p>

<p>The waves had reached his waist.</p>

<p>The tide was rising: time was passing away.</p>

<p>The seamews and cormorants flew about him restlessly, as
if anxious to warn him of his danger. It seemed as if some
of his old companions of the Douvres rocks flying there had
recognised him.</p>

<p>An hour had passed.</p>

<p>The wind from the sea was scarcely felt in the roads; but the
form of the <i>Cashmere</i> was rapidly growing less. The sloop,
according to all appearance, was sailing fast. It was already
nearly off the Casquets.</p>

<p>There was no foam around the Gild-Holm-'Ur; no wave beat
against its granite sides. The water rose peacefully. It was
nearly level with Gilliatt's shoulders.</p>

<p>Another hour had passed.</p>

<p>The <i>Cashmere</i> was beyond the waters of Aurigny. The
Ortach rock concealed it for a moment; it passed behind it, and
came forth again as from an eclipse. The sloop was veering to
the north upon the open sea. It was now only a point glittering
in the sun.</p>

<p>The birds were hovering about Gilliatt, uttering short cries.
Only his head was now visible. The tide was nearly at the full.
Evening was approaching. Behind him, in the roads, a few
fishing-boats were making for the harbour.</p>

<p>Gilliatt's eyes continued fixed upon the vessel in the horizon.
Their expression resembled nothing earthly. A strange lustre
shone in their calm and tragic depths. There was in them the
peace of vanished hopes, the calm but sorrowful acceptance of
an end far different from his dreams. By degrees the dusk of
heaven began to darken in them, though gazing still upon the
point in space. At the same moment the wide waters round the
Gild-Holm-'Ur and the vast gathering twilight closed upon them.</p>

<p>The <i>Cashmere</i>, now scarcely perceptible, had become a mere
spot in the thin haze.</p>

<p>Gradually, the spot, which was but a shape, grew paler.</p>

<p>Then it dwindled, and finally disappeared.</p>

<p>At the moment when the vessel vanished on the line of the
horizon, the head of Gilliatt disappeared. Nothing was visible
now but the sea.</p>
