<h4>I</h4>

<h5>A TROUBLED LIFE, BUT A QUIET CONSCIENCE</h5>


<p>Mess Lethierry, a conspicuous man in St. Sampson, was a
redoubtable sailor. He had voyaged a great deal. He had
been a cabin-boy, seaman, topmast-man, second mate, mate,
pilot, and captain. He was at this period a ship-owner. There
was not a man to compare with him for general knowledge of
the sea. He was brave in putting off to ships in distress. In
foul weather he would take his way along the beach, scanning
the horizon. "What have we yonder?" he would say; "some
craft in trouble?" Whether it were an interloping Weymouth
fisherman, a cutter from Aurigny, a bisquine from Courseulle, the
yacht of some nobleman, an English craft or a French one—poor
or rich, mattered little. He jumped into a boat, called together
two or three strong fellows, or did without them, as the case
might be, pushed out to sea, rose and sank, and rose again on
rolling waves, plunged into the storm, and encountered the
danger face to face. Then afar off, amid the rain and lightning,
and drenched with water, he was sometimes seen upright in his
boat like a lion with a foaming mane. Often he would pass
whole days in danger amidst the waves, the hail, and the wind,
making his way to the sides of foundering vessels during the
tempest, and rescuing men and merchandise. At night, after
feats like these, he would return home, and pass his time in
knitting stockings.</p>

<p>For fifty years he led this kind of life—from ten years of age
to sixty—so long did he feel himself still young. At sixty, he
began to discover that he could no longer lift with one hand
the great anvil at the forge of Varclin. This anvil weighed
three hundredweight. At length rheumatic pains compelled
him to be a prisoner; he was forced to give up his old struggle
with the sea, to pass from the heroic into the patriarchal stage,
to sink into the condition of a harmless, worthy old fellow.</p>

<p>Happily his rheumatism attacks happened at the period when
he had secured a comfortable competency. These two consequences
of labour are natural companions. At the moment when
men become rich, how often comes paralysis—the sorrowful
crowning of a laborious life!</p>

<p>Old and weary men say among themselves, "Let us rest and
enjoy life."</p>

<p>The population of islands like Guernsey is composed of men
who have passed their lives in going about their little fields or
in sailing round the world. These are the two classes of the
labouring people; the labourers on the land, and the toilers of
the sea. Mess Lethierry was of the latter class; he had had a
life of hard work. He had been upon the continent; was for
some time a ship carpenter at Rochefort, and afterwards at
Cette. We have just spoken of sailing round the world; he had
made the circuit of all France, getting work as a journeyman
carpenter; and had been employed at the great salt works of
Franche-Comte. Though a humble man, he had led a life of
adventure. In France he had learned to read, to think, to have
a will of his own. He had had a hand in many things, and in
all he had done had kept a character for probity. At bottom,
however, he was simply a sailor. The water was his element;
he used to say that he lived with the fish when really at home.
In short, his whole existence, except two or three years,
had been devoted to the ocean. Flung into the water, as he
said, he had navigated the great oceans both of the Atlantic and
the Pacific, but he preferred the Channel. He used to exclaim
enthusiastically, "That is the sea for a rough time of it!" He
was born at sea, and at sea would have preferred to end his days.
After sailing several times round the world, and seeing most
countries, he had returned to Guernsey, and never permanently
left the island again. Henceforth his great voyages were to
Granville and St. Malo.</p>

<p>Mess Lethierry was a Guernsey man—that peculiar amalgamation
of Frenchman and Norman, or rather English. He had
within himself this quadruple extraction, merged and almost
lost in that far wider country, the ocean. Throughout his life
and wheresoever he went, he had preserved the habits of a
Norman fisherman.</p>

<p>All this, however, did not prevent his looking now and then
into some old book; of taking pleasure in reading, in knowing
the names of philosophers and poets, and in talking a little now
and then in all languages.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>II</h4>

<h5>A CERTAIN PREDILECTION</h5>


<p>Gilliatt was a child of Nature. Mess Lethierry was the same.</p>

<p>Lethierry's uncultivated nature, however, was not without
certain refinements.</p>

<p>He was fastidious upon the subject of women's hands. In
his early years, while still a lad, passing from the stage of cabin-boy
to that of sailor, he had heard the Admiral de Suffren say,
"There goes a pretty girl; but what horrible great red hands."
An observation from an admiral on any subject is a command,
a law, an authority far above that of an oracle. The exclamation
of Admiral de Suffren had rendered Lethierry fastidious and
exacting in the matter of small and white hands. His own
hand, a large club fist of the colour of mahogany, was like a
mallet or a pair of pincers for a friendly grasp, and, tightly closed,
would almost break a paving-stone.</p>

<p>He had never married; he had either no inclination for
matrimony, or had never found a suitable match. That, perhaps,
was due to his being a stickler for hands like those of a
duchess. Such hands are, indeed, somewhat rare among the
fishermen's daughters at Portbail.</p>

<p>It was whispered, however, that at Rochefort, on the Charente,
he had, once upon a time, made the acquaintance of a certain
grisette, realising his ideal. She was a pretty girl with graceful
hands; but she was a vixen, and had also a habit of scratching.
Woe betide any one who attacked her! yet her nails, though
capable at a pinch of being turned into claws, were of a cleanliness
which left nothing to be desired. It was these peculiarly
bewitching nails which had first enchanted and then disturbed
the peace of Lethierry, who, fearing that he might one day
become no longer master of his mistress, had decided not to
conduct that young lady to the nuptial altar.</p>

<p>Another time he met at Aurigny a country girl who pleased
him. He thought of marriage, when one of the inhabitants of
the place said to him, "I congratulate you; you will have for
your wife a good fuel maker." Lethierry asked the meaning of
this. It appeared that the country people at Aurigny have a
certain custom of collecting manure from their cow-houses,
which they throw against a wall, where it is left to dry and fall
to the ground. Cakes of dried manure of this kind are used for
fuel, and are called <i>coipiaux</i>. A country girl of Aurigny has no
chance of getting a husband if she is not a good fuel maker;
but the young lady's especial talent only inspired disgust in
Lethierry.</p>

<p>Besides, he had in his love matters a kind of rough country
folks' philosophy, a sailor-like sort of habit of mind. Always
smitten but never enslaved, he boasted of having been in his
youth easily conquered by a petticoat, or rather a <i>cotillon</i>; for
what is now-a-days called a crinoline, was in his time called a
<i>cotillon</i>; a term which, in his use of it, signifies both something
more and something less than a wife.</p>

<p>These rude seafaring men of the Norman Archipelago, have
a certain amount of shrewdness. Almost all can read and write.
On Sundays, little cabin-boys may be seen in those parts, seated
upon a coil of ropes, reading, with book in hand. From all
time these Norman sailors have had a peculiar satirical vein,
and have been famous for clever sayings. It was one of these
men, the bold pilot Quéripel, who said to Montgomery, when he
sought refuge in Jersey after the unfortunate accident in killing
Henry II. at a tournament, with a blow of his lance, "<i>Tête folle
a cassé tête vide</i>." Another one, Touzeau, a sea-captain at St.
Brélade, was the author of that philosophical pun, erroneously
attributed to Camus, "<i>Après la mort, les papes deviennent
papillons, et les sires deviennent cirons</i>."</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>III</h4>

<h5>THE OLD SEA LANGUAGE</h5>


<p>The mariners of the Channel are the true ancient Gauls.
The islands, which in these days become rapidly more and
more English—preserved for many ages their old French character.
The peasant in Sark speaks the language of Louis XIV.
Forty years ago, the old classical nautical language was to be
found in the mouths of the sailors of Jersey and Aurigny. When
amongst them, it was possible to imagine oneself carried back
to the sea life of the seventeenth century. From that speaking
trumpet which terrified Admiral Hidde, a philologist might
have learnt the ancient technicalities of manœuvring and giving
orders at sea, in the very words which were roared out to his
sailors by Jean Bart. The old French maritime vocabulary is
now almost entirely changed, but was still in use in Jersey in
1820. A ship that was a good plyer was <i>bon boulinier</i>; one that
carried a weather-helm in spite of her foresails and rudder was
<i>un vaisseau ardent</i>; to get under way was <i>prendre aire</i>; to lie
to in a storm, <i>capeyer</i>; to make fast running rigging was <i>faire
dormant</i>; to get to windward, <i>faire chapelle</i>; to keep the cable
tight, <i>faire teste</i>; to be out of trim, <i>être en pantenne</i>; to keep
the sails full, <i>porter plain</i>. These expressions have fallen out
of use. To-day we say <i>louvoyer</i> for to beat to windward, they
said <i>leauvoyer</i>; for <i>naviguer</i>, sail, they said <i>naviger</i>; for <i>virer
vent devant</i>, to tack, <i>donner vent devant</i>; for <i>aller de l'avant</i>, to
make headway, <i>tailler de l'avant</i>; for <i>tirez d'accord</i>, haul
together, <i>halez d'accord</i>; for <i>dérapez</i>, to weigh anchor, <i>deplantez</i>;
for <i>embraquez</i>, to haul tight, <i>abraquez</i>; for <i>taquets</i>, cleats,
<i>bittons</i>; for <i>burins</i>, toggles, <i>tappes</i>; for <i>balancine</i>, fore-lift,
main-lift, etc., <i>valancine</i>; for <i>tribord</i>, starboard, <i>stribord</i>; for
<i>les hommes de quart à bâbord</i>, men of the larboard watch, <i>les
basbourdis</i>. Tourville wrote to Hocquincourt: <i>nous avons singlét</i>
(sailed), for <i>cinglé</i>. Instead of <i>la rafale</i>, squall, <i>le raffal</i>;
instead of <i>bossoir</i>, cat-head, <i>boussoir</i>; instead of <i>drosse</i>, truss,
<i>drousse</i>; instead of <i>loffer</i>, to luff, <i>faire une olofée</i>; instead of
<i>elonger</i>, to lay alongside, <i>alonger</i>; instead of <i>forte brise</i>, stiff
breeze, <i>survent</i>; instead of <i>jouail</i>, stock of an anchor, <i>jas</i>;
instead of <i>soute</i>, store-room, <i>fosse</i>.</p>

<p>Such, at the beginning of this century, was the maritime
dialect of the Channel Islands. Ango would have been
startled had he heard the speech of a Jersey pilot. Whilst
everywhere else the sails <i>faseyaient</i> (shivered), in these islands
they <i>barbeyaient</i>. A <i>saute de vent</i>, sudden shift of wind, was a
<i>folle-vente</i>. The old methods of mooring known as <i>la valture</i>
and <i>la portugaise</i> were alone used, and such commands as
<i>jour-et-chaque!</i> and <i>bosse et vilte!</i> might still be heard. While a
sailor of Granville was already employing the word <i>clan</i> for
sheave-hold, one of St. Aubin or of St. Sampson still stuck to
his <i>canal de pouliot</i>. What was called <i>bout d'alonge</i> (upper
fultock) at St. Malo, was <i>oreille d'âne</i> at St. Helier. Mess
Lethierry, as did the Duke de Vibonne, called the sheer of the
decks <i>la tonture</i>, and the caulker's chisel <i>la patarasse</i>.</p>

<p>It was with this uncouth sea dialect in his mouth that
Duquesne beat De Ruyter, that Duguay Trouin defeated
Wasnaer, and that Tourville, in 1681, poured a broadside into
the first galley which bombarded Algiers. It is now a dead
language. The idiom of the sea is altogether different.
Duperré would not be able to understand Suffren.</p>

<p>The language of French naval signals is not less transformed;
there is a long distance between the four pennants, red, white,
yellow, and blue, of Labourdonnaye, and the eighteen flags of
these days, which, hoisted two and two, three and three, or four
and four, furnish, for distant communication, sixty-six thousand
combinations, are never deficient, and, so to speak, foresee the
unforeseen.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
<h4>IV</h4>

<h5>ONE IS VULNERABLE WHERE ONE LOVES</h5>


<p>Mess Lethierry's heart and hand were always ready—a large
heart and a large hand. His failing was that admirable one,
self-confidence. He had a certain fashion of his own of undertaking
to do a thing. It was a solemn fashion. He said, "I
give my word of honour to do it, with God's help." That said,
he went through with his duty. He put his faith in God—nothing
more. His rare churchgoing was merely formal. At
sea he was superstitious.</p>

<p>Nevertheless, the storm had never yet arisen which could
daunt him. One reason of this was his impatience of opposition.
He could tolerate it neither from the ocean nor anything else.
He meant to have his way; so much the worse for the sea if it
thwarted him. It might try, if it would, but Mess Lethierry
would not give in. A refractory wave could no more stop him
than an angry neighbour. What he had said was said; what
he planned out was done. He bent neither before an objection
nor before the tempest. The word "no" had no existence for
him, whether it was in the mouth of a man or in the angry
muttering of a thunder-cloud. In the teeth of all he went on in
his way. He would take no refusals. Hence his obstinacy in
life, and his intrepidity on the ocean.</p>

<p>He seasoned his simple meal of fish soup for himself, knowing
the quantities of pepper, salt, and herbs which it required, and
was as well pleased with the cooking as with the meal. To
complete the sketch of Lethierry's peculiarities, the reader must
conjure a being to whom the putting on of a surtout would
amount to a transfiguration; whom a landsman's greatcoat
would convert into a strange animal; one who, standing with
his locks blown about by the wind, might have represented old
Jean Bart, but who, in the landsman's round hat, would have
looked an idiot; awkward in cities, wild and redoubtable at sea;
a man with broad shoulders, fit for a porter; one who indulged
in no oaths, was rarely in anger, whose voice had a soft accent,
which became like thunder in a speaking-trumpet; a peasant
who had read something of the philosophy of Diderot and
D'Alembert; a Guernsey man who had seen the great Revolution;
a learned ignoramus, free from bigotry, but indulging in
visions, with more faith in the White Lady than in the Holy
Virgin; possessing the strength of Polyphemus, the perseverance
of Columbus, with a little of the bull in his nature, and a little
of the child. Add to these physical and mental peculiarities a
somewhat flat nose, large cheeks, a set of teeth still perfect, a
face filled with wrinkles, and which seemed to have been
buffeted by the waves and subjected to the beating of the winds
of forty years, a brow in which the storm and tempest were
plainly written—an incarnation of a rock in the open sea. Add
to this, too, a good-tempered smile always ready to light up his
weather-beaten countenance, and you have before you Mess
Lethierry.</p>

<p>Mess Lethierry had two special objects of affection only.
Their names were Durande and Déruchette.</p>



