<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2-4" id="chapter-2-4-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>III</h4>

<h5>ANOTHER KIND OF SEA-COMBAT</h5>


<p>Such was the creature in whose power Gilliatt had fallen for
some minutes.</p>

<p>The monster was the inhabitant of the grotto; the terrible
genii of the place. A kind of sombre demon of the water.</p>

<p>All the splendours of the cavern existed for it alone.</p>

<p>On the day of the previous month when Gilliatt had first
penetrated into the grotto, the dark outline, vaguely perceived
by him in the ripples of the secret waters, was this monster. It
was here in its home.</p>

<p>When entering for the second time into the cavern in pursuit
of the crab, he had observed the crevice in which he supposed
that the crab had taken refuge, the pieuvre was there lying in
wait for prey.</p>

<p>Is it possible to imagine that secret ambush?</p>

<p>No bird would brood, no egg would burst to life, no flower
would dare to open, no breast to give milk, no heart to love,
no spirit to soar, under the influence of that apparition of evil
watching with sinister patience in the dusk.</p>

<p>Gilliatt had thrust his arm deep into the opening; the monster
had snapped at it. It held him fast, as the spider holds the fly.</p>

<p>He was in the water up to his belt; his naked feet clutching
the slippery roundness of the huge stones at the bottom; his
right arm bound and rendered powerless by the flat coils of the
long tentacles of the creature, and his body almost hidden under
the folds and cross folds of this horrible bandage.</p>

<p>Of the eight arms of the devil-fish three adhered to the rock,
while five encircled Gilliatt. In this way, clinging to the granite
on the one hand, and with the other to its human prey, it enchained
him to the rock. Two hundred and fifty suckers were
upon him, tormenting him with agony and loathing. He was
grasped by gigantic hands, the fingers of which were each nearly
a yard long, and furnished inside with living blisters eating into
the flesh.</p>

<p>As we have said, it is impossible to tear oneself from the folds
of the devil-fish. The attempt ends only in a firmer grasp.
The monster clings with more determined force. Its effort
increases with that of its victim; every struggle produces a
tightening of its ligatures.</p>

<p>Gilliatt had but one resource, his knife.</p>

<p>His left hand only was free; but the reader knows with what
power he could use it. It might have been said that he had
two right hands.</p>

<p>His open knife was in his hand.</p>

<p>The antenna of the devil-fish cannot be cut; it is a leathery
substance impossible to divide with the knife, it slips under the
edge; its position in attack also is such that to cut it would be
to wound the victim's own flesh.</p>

<p>The creature is formidable, but there is a way of resisting it.
The fishermen of Sark know this, as does any one who has seen
them execute certain movements in the sea. The porpoises
know it also; they have a way of biting the cuttle-fish which
decapitates it. Hence the frequent sight on the sea of pen-fish,
poulps, and cuttle-fish without heads.</p>

<p>The cephaloptera, in fact, is only vulnerable through the
head.</p>

<p>Gilliatt was not ignorant of this fact.</p>

<p>He had never seen a devil-fish of this size. His first encounter
was with one of the larger species. Another would have been
powerless with terror.</p>

<p>With the devil-fish, as with a furious bull, there is a certain
moment in the conflict which must be seized. It is the instant
when the bull lowers the neck; it is the instant when the devil-fish
advances its head. The movement is rapid. He who loses
that moment is destroyed.</p>

<p>The things we have described occupied only a few moments.
Gilliatt, however, felt the increasing power of its innumerable
suckers.</p>

<p>The monster is cunning; it tries first to stupefy its prey. It
seizes and then pauses awhile.</p>

<p>Gilliatt grasped his knife; the sucking increased.</p>

<p>He looked at the monster, which seemed to look at him.</p>

<p>Suddenly it loosened from the rock its sixth antenna, and
darting it at him, seized him by the left arm.</p>

<p>At the same moment it advanced its head with a violent
movement. In one second more its mouth would have fastened
on his breast. Bleeding in the sides, and with his two arms
entangled, he would have been a dead man.</p>

<p>But Gillian was watchful. He avoided the antenna, and at
the moment when the monster darted forward to fasten on his
breast, he struck it with the knife clenched in his left hand.
There were two convulsions in opposite directions; that of the
devil-fish and that of its prey. The movement was rapid as a
double flash of lightnings.</p>

<p>He had plunged the blade of his knife into the flat slimy substance,
and by a rapid movement, like the flourish of a whip in
the air, describing a circle round the two eyes, he wrenched the
head off as a man would draw a tooth.</p>

<p>The struggle was ended. The folds relaxed. The monster
dropped away, like the slow detaching of bands. The four
hundred suckers, deprived of their sustaining power, dropped
at once from the man and the rock. The mass sank to the
bottom of the water.</p>

<p>Breathless with the struggle, Gilliatt could perceive upon the
stones at his feet two shapeless, slimy heaps, the head on one
side, the remainder of the monster on the other.</p>

<p>Fearing, nevertheless, some convulsive return of his agony,
he recoiled to avoid the reach of the dreaded tentacles.</p>

<p>But the monster was quite dead.</p>

<p>Gilliatt closed his knife.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
