<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2-1" id="chapter-2-1-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>VII</h4>

<h5>A CHAMBER FOR THE VOYAGER</h5>


<p>Half-an-hour afterwards, Gilliatt having returned to the
wreck, climbed to the deck, went below, and descended into the
hold, completing the summary survey of his first visit.</p>

<p>By the help of the capstan he had raised to the deck of the
Durande the package which he had made of the lading of the
sloop. The capstan had worked well. Bars for turning it
were not wanting. Gilliatt had only to take his choice among
the heap of wreck.</p>

<p>He found among the fragments a chisel, dropped, no doubt,
from the carpenter's box, and which he added to his little
stock of tools.</p>

<p>Besides this—for in poverty of appliances so complete everything
counts for a little—he had his jack-knife in his pocket.</p>

<p>Gilliatt worked the whole day long on the wreck, clearing
away, propping, arranging.</p>

<p>At nightfall he observed the following facts:</p>

<p>The entire wreck shook in the wind. The carcass trembled
at every step he took. There was nothing stable or strong
except the portion of the hull jammed between the rocks which
contained the engine. There the beams were powerfully supported
by the granite walls.</p>

<p>Fixing his home in the Durande would be imprudent. It
would increase the weight; but far from adding to her burden,
it was important to lighten it. To burden the wreck in any
way was indeed the very contrary of what he wanted.</p>

<p>The mass of ruin required, in fact, the most careful management.
It was like a sick man at the approach of dissolution.
The wind would do sufficient to help it to its end.</p>

<p>It was, moreover, unfortunate enough to be compelled to
work there. The amount of disturbance which the wreck
would have to withstand would necessarily distress it, perhaps
beyond its strength.</p>

<p>Besides, if any accident should happen in the night while
Gilliatt was sleeping, he must necessarily perish with the vessel.
No assistance was possible; all would be over. In order to help
the shattered vessel, it was absolutely necessary to remain outside
it.</p>

<p>How to be outside and yet near it, this was the problem.</p>

<p>The difficulty became more complicated as he considered it.</p>

<p>Where could he find a shelter under such conditions?</p>

<p>Gilliatt reflected.</p>

<p>There remained nothing but the two Douvres. They seemed
hopeless enough.</p>

<p>From below, it was possible to distinguish upon the upper
plateau of the Great Douvre a sort of protuberance.</p>

<p>High rocks with flattened summits, like the Great Douvre
and "The Man," are a sort of decapitated peaks. They abound
among the mountains and in the ocean. Certain rocks, particularly
those which are met with in the open sea, bear marks like
half-felled trees. They have the appearance of having received
blows from a hatchet. They have been subjected, in fact, to
the blows of the gale, that indefatigable pioneer of the sea.</p>

<p>There are other still more profound causes of marine convulsions.
Hence the innumerable bruises upon these primeval
masses of granite. Some of these sea giants have their heads
struck off.</p>

<p>Sometimes these heads, from some inexplicable cause, do not
fall, but remain shattered on the summit of the mutilated trunk.
This singularity is by no means rare. The Devil's Rock, at
Guernsey, and the Table, in the Valley of Anweiler, illustrate
some of the most surprising features of this strange geological
enigma.</p>

<p>Some such phenomena had probably fashioned the summit of
the Great Douvre.</p>

<p>If the protuberance which could be observed on the plateau
were not a natural irregularity in the stone, it must necessarily
be some remaining fragment of the shattered summit.</p>

<p>Perhaps the fragment might contain some excavation—some
hole into which a man could creep for cover. Gilliatt asked for
no more.</p>

<p>But how could he reach the plateau? How could he scale
that perpendicular wall, hard and polished as a pebble, half
covered with the growth of glutinous confervæ, and having the
slippery look of a soapy surface?</p>

<p>The ridge of the plateau was at least thirty feet above the
deck of the Durande.</p>

<p>Gilliatt took out of his box of tools the knotted cord, hooked
it to his belt by the grapnel, and set to work to scale the Little
Douvre. The ascent became more difficult as he climbed.
He had forgotten to take off his shoes, a fact which increased
the difficulty. With great labour and straining, however, he
reached the point. Safely arrived there, he raised himself and
stood erect. There was scarcely room for his two feet. To
make it his lodging would be difficult. A Stylite might have
contented himself there; Gilliatt, more luxurious in his requirements,
wanted something more commodious.</p>

<p>The Little Douvre, leaning towards the great one, looked
from a distance as if it was saluting it, and the space between
the Douvres, which was some score of feet below, was only
eight or ten at the highest points.</p>

<p>From the spot to which he had climbed, Gilliatt saw more
distinctly the rocky excrescence which partly covered the
plateau of the Great Douvre.</p>

<p>This plateau rose three fathoms at least above his head.</p>

<p>A precipice separated him from it. The curved escarpment
of the Little Douvre sloped away out of sight beneath
him.</p>

<p>He detached the knotted rope from his belt, took a rapid
glance at the dimensions of the rock, and slung the grapnel up
to the plateau.</p>

<p>The grapnel scratched the rock, and slipped. The knotted
rope with the hooks at its end fell down beneath his feet, swinging
against the side of the little Douvre.</p>

<p>He renewed the attempt; slung the rope further, aiming at the
granite protuberance, in which he could perceive crevices and
scratches.</p>

<p>The cast was, this time, so neat and skilful, that the hooks
caught.</p>

<p>He pulled from below. A portion of the rock broke away, and
the knotted rope with its heavy iron came down once more,
striking the escarpment beneath his feet.</p>

<p>He slung the grapnel a third time.</p>

<p>It did not fall.</p>

<p>He put a strain upon the rope; it resisted. The grapnel was
firmly anchored.</p>

<p>The hooks had caught in some fracture of the plateau which
he could not see.</p>

<p>It was necessary to trust his life to that unknown support.</p>

<p>He did not hesitate.</p>

<p>The matter was urgent. He was compelled to take the
shortest route.</p>

<p>Moreover, to descend again to the deck of the Durande, in
order to devise some other step, was impossible. A slip was
probable, and a fall almost certain. It was easier to climb than
to descend.</p>

<p>Gilliatt's movements were decisive, as are those of all good
sailors. He never wasted force. He always proportioned his
efforts to the work in hand. Hence the prodigies of strength
which he executed with ordinary muscles. His biceps were
no more powerful than that of ordinary men; but his heart was
firmer. He added, in fact, to strength which is physical, energy
which belongs to the moral faculties.</p>

<p>The feat to be accomplished was appalling.</p>

<p>It was to cross the space between the two Douvres, hanging
only by this slender line.</p>

<p>Oftentimes in the path of duty and devotedness, the figure of
death rises before men to present these terrible questions:</p>

<p>Wilt thou do this? asks the shadow.</p>

<p>Gilliatt tested the cord again; the grappling-iron held firm.</p>

<p>Wrapping his left hand in his handkerchief, he grasped the
knotted cord with his right hand, which he covered with his
left; then stretching out one foot, and striking out sharply
with the other against the rock, in order that the impetus might
prevent the rope twisting, he precipitated himself from the
height of the Little Douvre on to the escarpment of the great one.</p>

<p>The shock was severe.</p>

<p>There was a rebound.</p>

<p>His clenched fists struck the rocks in their turn; the handkerchief
had loosened, and they were scratched; they had
indeed narrowly escaped being crushed.</p>

<p>Gilliatt remained hanging there a moment dizzy.</p>

<p>He was sufficiently master of himself not to let go his hold of
the cord.</p>

<p>A few moments passed in jerks and oscillations before he
could catch the cord with his feet; but he succeeded at last.</p>

<p>Recovering himself, and holding the cord at last between his
naked feet as with two hands, he gazed into the depth below.</p>

<p>He had no anxiety about the length of the cord, which had
many a time served him for great heights. The cord, in fact,
trailed upon the deck of the Durande.</p>

<p>Assured of being able to descend again, he began to climb
hand over hand, and still clinging with his feet.</p>

<p>In a few moments he had gained the summit.</p>

<p>Never before had any creature without wings found a footing
there. The plateau was covered in parts with the dung of
birds. It was an irregular trapezium, a mass struck off from
the colossal granitic prism of the Great Douvre. This block
was hollowed in the centre like a basin—a work of the rain.</p>

<p>Gilliatt, in fact, had guessed correctly.</p>

<p>At the southern angle of the block, he found a mass of superimposed
rocks, probably fragments of the fallen summit. These
rocks, looking like a heap of giant paving-stones, would have
left room for a wild beast, if one could have found its way there,
to secrete himself between them. They supported themselves
confusedly one against the other, leaving interstices like a heap
of ruins. They formed neither grottoes nor caves, but the pile
was full of holes like a sponge. One of these holes was large
enough to admit a man.</p>

<p>This recess had a flooring of moss and a few tufts of grass.
Gilliatt could fit himself in it as in a kind of sheath. The recess
at its entrance was about two feet high. It contracted towards
the bottom. Stone coffins sometimes have this form. The
mass of rocks behind lying towards the south-west, the recess
was sheltered from the showers, but was open to the cold north
wind.</p>

<p>Gilliatt was satisfied with the place.</p>

<p>The two chief problems were solved; the sloop had a harbour,
and he had found a shelter.</p>

<p>The chief merit of his cave was its accessibility from the
wreck.</p>

<p>The grappling-iron of the knotted cord having fallen between
two blocks, had become firmly hooked, but Gilliatt rendered it
more difficult to give way by rolling a huge stone upon it.</p>

<p>He was now free to operate at leisure upon the Durande.</p>

<p>Henceforth he was at home.</p>

<p>The Great Douvre was his dwelling; the Durande was his
workshop.</p>

<p>Nothing was more simple for him than going to and fro,
ascending and descending.</p>

<p>He dropped down easily by the knotted cord on to the
deck.</p>

<p>The day's work was a good one, the enterprise had begun
well; he was satisfied, and began to feel hungry.</p>

<p>He untied his basket of provisions, opened his knife, cut a
slice of smoked beef, took a bite out of his brown loaf, drank
a draught from his can of fresh water, and supped admirably.</p>

<p>To do well and eat well are two satisfactions. A full stomach
resembles an easy conscience.</p>

<p>This supper was ended, and there was still before him a little
more daylight. He took advantage of it to begin the lightening
of the wreck—an urgent necessity.</p>

<p>He had passed part of the day in gathering up the fragments.
He put on one side, in the strong compartment which contained
the machine, all that might become of use to him, such as wood,
iron, cordage, and canvas. What was useless he cast into the
sea.</p>

<p>The cargo of the sloop hoisted on to the deck by the capstan,
compact as he had made it, was an encumbrance. Gilliatt
surveyed the species of niche, at a height within his reach, in
the side of the Little Douvre. These natural closets, not shut
in, it is true, are often seen in the rocks. It struck him that
it was possible to trust some stores to this depôt, and he accordingly
placed in the back of the recess his two boxes containing
his tools and his clothing, and his two bags holding the rye-meal
and the biscuit. In the front—a little too near the edge perhaps,
but he had no other place—he rested his basket of provisions.</p>

<p>He had taken care to remove from the box of clothing his
sheepskin, his loose coat with a hood, and his waterproof
overalls.</p>

<p>To lessen the hold of the wind upon the knotted cord, he made
the lower extremity fast to one of the riders of the Durande.</p>

<p>The Durande being much driven in, this rider was bent a
good deal, and it held the end of the cord as firmly as a tight
hand.</p>

<p>There was still the difficulty of the upper end of the cord.
To control the lower part was well, but at the summit of the
escarpment at the spot where the knotted cord met the ridge of
the plateau, there was reason to fear that it would be fretted
and worn away by the sharp angle of the rock.</p>

<p>Gilliatt searched in the heap of rubbish in reserve, and took
from it some rags of sail-cloth, and from a bunch of old cables he
pulled out some strands of rope-yarn with which he filled his
pockets.</p>

<p>A sailor would have guessed that he intended to bind with
these pieces of sail-cloth and ends of yarn the part of the
knotted rope upon the edge of the rock, so as to preserve it from
all friction—an operation which is called "keckling."</p>

<p>Having provided himself with these things, he drew on his
overalls over his legs, put on his waterproof coat over his jacket,
drew its hood over his red cap, hung the sheepskin round his
neck by the two legs, and clothed in this complete panoply, he
grasped the cord, now firmly fixed to the side of the Great
Douvre, and mounted to the assault of that sombre citadel in
the sea.</p>

<p>In spite of his scratched hands, Gilliatt easily regained the
summit.</p>

<p>The last pale tints of sunset were fading in the sky. It was
night upon the sea below. A little light still lingered upon the
height of the Douvre.</p>

<p>Gilliatt took advantage of this remains of daylight to bind
the knotted rope. He wound it round again and again at the
part which passed over the edge of the rock, with a bandage of
several thicknesses of canvas strongly tied at every turn. The
whole resembled in some degree the padding which actresses
place upon their knees, to prepare them for the agonies and
supplications of the fifth act.</p>

<p>This binding completely accomplished, Gilliatt rose from his
stooping position.</p>

<p>For some moments, while he had been busied in his task,
he had had a confused sense of a singular fluttering in the
air.</p>

<p>It resembled, in the silence of the evening, the noise which an
immense bat might make with the beating of its wings.</p>

<p>Gilliatt raised his eyes.</p>

<p>A great black circle was revolving over his head in the pale
twilight sky.</p>

<p>Such circles are seen in pictures round the heads of saints.
These, however, are golden on a dark ground, while the circle
around Gilliatt was dark upon a pale ground. The effect was
strange. It spread round the Great Douvre like the aureole of
night.</p>

<p>The circle drew nearer, then retired; grew narrower, and
then spread wide again.</p>

<p>It was an immense flight of gulls, seamews, and cormorants;
a vast multitude of affrighted sea birds.</p>

<p>The Great Douvre was probably their lodging, and they were
coming to rest for the night. Gilliatt had taken a chamber in
their home. It was evident that their unexpected fellow-lodger
disturbed them.</p>

<p>A man there was an object they had never beheld before.</p>

<p>Their wild flutter continued for some time.</p>

<p>They seemed to be waiting for the stranger to leave the place.</p>

<p>Gilliatt followed them dreamily with his eyes.</p>

<p>The flying multitude seemed at last to give up their design.
The circle suddenly took a spiral form, and the cloud of sea
birds came down upon "The Man Rock" at the extremity of
the group, where they seemed to be conferring and deliberating.</p>

<p>Gilliatt, after settling down in his alcove of granite, and
covering a stone for a pillow for his head, could hear the birds
for a long time chattering one after the other, or croaking, as
if in turns.</p>

<p>Then they were silent, and all were sleeping—the birds upon
their rock, Gilliatt upon his.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
