<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3-2" id="chapter-3-2-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>II</h4>

<h5>THE LEATHERN TRUNK</h5>


<p>At break of day St. Sampson was on foot, and all the people
of St. Peter's Port began to flock there. The resurrection of
the Durande caused a commotion in the island not unlike what
was caused by the <i>Salette</i> in the south of France. There was a
crowd on the quay staring at the funnel standing erect in the
sloop. They were anxious to see and handle the machinery;
but Lethierry, after making a new and triumphant survey of
the whole by daylight, had placed two sailors aboard with
instructions to prevent any one approaching it. The funnel,
however, furnished food enough for contemplation. The crowd
gaped with astonishment. They talked of nothing but Gilliatt.
They remarked on his surname of "malicious Gilliatt;" and
their admiration wound up with the remark, "It is not pleasant
to have people in the island who can do things like that."</p>

<p>Mess Lethierry was seen from outside the house, seated at a
table before the window, writing, with one eye on the paper
and another on the sloop. He was so completely absorbed that
he had only once stopped to call Douce and ask after Déruchette.
Douce replied, "Mademoiselle has risen and is gone out."
Mess Lethierry replied, "She is right to take the air. She was
a little unwell last night, owing to the heat. There was a crowd
in the room. This and her surprise and joy, and the windows
being all closed, overcame her. She will have a husband to be
proud of." And he had gone on with his writing. He had
already finished and sealed two letters, addressed to the most
important shipbuilders at Brême. He now finished the sealing
of a third.</p>

<p>The noise of a wheel upon the quay induced him to look up.
He leaned out of the window, and observed coming from the
path which led to the Bû de la Rue a boy pushing a wheelbarrow.
The boy was going towards St. Peter's Port. In the barrow
was a portmanteau of brown leather, studded with nails of
brass and white metal.</p>

<p>Mess Lethierry called to the boy:</p>

<p>"Where are you going, my lad?"</p>

<p>The boy stopped, and replied:</p>

<p>"To the <i>Cashmere</i>."</p>

<p>"What for?"</p>

<p>"To take this trunk aboard."</p>

<p>"Very good; you shall take these three letters too."</p>

<p>Mess Lethierry opened the drawer of his table, took a piece of
string, tied the three letters which he had just written across
and across, and threw the packet to the boy, who caught it
between his hands.</p>

<p>"Tell the captain of the <i>Cashmere</i> they are my letters, and to
take care of them. They are for Germany—Brême <i>viâ</i> London."</p>

<p>"I can't speak to the captain, Mess Lethierry."</p>

<p>"Why not?"</p>

<p>"The <i>Cashmere</i> is not at the quay."</p>

<p>"Ah!"</p>

<p>"She is in the roads."</p>

<p>"Ay, true; on account of the sea."</p>

<p>"I can only speak to the man who takes the things
aboard."</p>

<p>"You will tell him, then, to look to the letters."</p>

<p>"Very well, Mess Lethierry."</p>

<p>"At what time does the <i>Cashmere</i> sail?"</p>

<p>"At twelve."</p>

<p>"The tide will flow at noon; she will have it against her."</p>

<p>"But she will have the wind," answered the lad.</p>

<p>"Boy," said Mess Lethierry, pointing with his forefinger at
the engine in the sloop, "do you see that? There is something
which laughs at winds and tides."</p>

<p>The boy put the letters in his pocket, took up the handles
of the barrow again, and went on his way towards the town.
Mess Lethierry called "Douce! Grace!"</p>

<p>Grace opened the door a little way.</p>

<p>"What is it, Mess?"</p>

<p>"Come in and wait a moment."</p>

<p>Mess Lethierry took a sheet of paper, and began to write. If
Grace, standing behind him, had been curious, and had leaned
forward while he was writing, she might have read as follows:—</p>

<p>"I have written to Brême for the timber. I have appointments
all the morning with carpenters for the estimate. The
rebuilding will go on fast. You must go yourself to the Deanery
for a licence. It is my wish that the marriage should take
place as soon as possible; immediately would be better. I am
busy about the Durande. Do you be busy about Déruchette."</p>

<p>He dated it and signed "Lethierry." He did not take the
trouble to seal it, but merely folded it in four, and handed it to
Grace, saying:</p>

<p>"Take that to Gilliatt."</p>

<p>"To the Bû de la Rue?"</p>

<p>"To the Bû de la Rue."</p>



		</section>
	</body>
</html>
