<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1-3" id="chapter-1-3-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>IV</h4>

<h5>CONTINUATION OF THE STORY OF UTOPIA</h5>


<p>It may be well imagined that the new enterprise did not prosper
much at first. The owners of cutters passing between the
Island of Guernsey and the French coast were loud in their
outcries. They denounced this attack upon the Holy Scriptures
and their monopoly. The chapels began to fulminate against
it. One reverend gentleman, named Elihu, stigmatised the
new steam-vessel as an "atheistical construction," and the
sailing-boat was declared the only orthodox craft. The people
saw the horns of the devil among the beasts which the fireship
carried to and fro. This storm of protest continued a considerable
time. At last, however, it began to be perceived that
these animals arrived less tired and sold better, their meat being
superior; that the sea risk was less also for passengers; that
this mode of travelling was less expensive, shorter, and more
sure; that they started at a fixed time, and arrived at a fixed
time; that consignments of fish travelling faster arrived fresher,
and that it was now possible to find a sale in the French markets
for the surplus of great takes of fish so common in Guernsey.
The butter, too, from the far-famed Guernsey cows, made the
passage quicker in the "Devil Boat" than in the old sailing
vessels, and lost nothing of its good quality, insomuch that
Dinan, in Brittany, began to become a customer for it, as well
as St. Brieuc and Rennes. In short, thanks to what they called
"Lethierry's Galley," the people enjoyed safe travelling,
regular communication, prompt and easy passages to and fro,
an increase of circulation, an extension of markets and of
commerce, and, finally, it was felt that it was necessary to
patronise this "Devil Boat," which flew in the face of the Holy
Scriptures, and brought wealth to the island. Some daring
spirits even went so far as to express a positive satisfaction at it.
Sieur Landoys, the registrar, bestowed his approval upon the
vessel—an undoubted piece of impartiality on his part, as he did
not like Lethierry. For, first of all, Lethierry was entitled to
the dignity of "Mess," while Landoys was merely "Sieur
Landoys." Then, although registrar of St. Peter's Port,
Landoys was a parishioner of St. Sampson. Now, there was
not in the entire parish another man besides them devoid of
prejudices. It seemed little enough, therefore, to indulge
themselves with a detestation of each other. Two of a trade,
says the proverb, rarely agree.</p>

<p>Sieur Landoys, however, had the honesty to support the
steamboat. Others followed Landoys. By little and little,
these facts multiplied. The growth of opinion is like the rising
tide. Time and the continued and increasing success of the
venture, with the evidence of real service rendered and the
improvement in the general welfare, gradually converted the
people; and the day at length arrived when, with the exception
of a few wiseacres, every one admired "Lethierry's Galley."</p>

<p>It would probably win less admiration now-a-days. This
steamboat of forty years since would doubtless provoke a smile
among our modern boat-builders; for this marvel was ill-shaped;
this prodigy was clumsy and infirm.</p>

<p>The distance between our grand Atlantic steam-vessels of the
present day and the boats with wheel-paddles which Denis
Papin floated on the Fulda in 1707, is not greater than that
between a three-decker, like the <i>Montebello</i>, 200 feet long,
having a mainyard of 115 feet, carrying a weight of 3000 tons,
1100 men, 120 guns, 10,000 cannon-balls, and 160 packages of
canister, belching forth at every broadside, when in action,
3300 pounds of iron, and spreading to the wind, when it moves,
5600 square mètres of canvas, and the old Danish galley of the
second century, discovered, full of stone hatchets, and bows and
clubs, in the mud of the seashore, at Wester-Satrup, and preserved
at the Hotel de Ville at Flensburg.</p>

<p>Exactly one hundred years—from 1707 to 1807—separate
the first paddle-boat of Papin from the first steamboat of Fulton.
"Lethierry's Galley" was assuredly a great improvement upon
those two rough sketches; but it was itself only a sketch. For
all that, it was a masterpiece in its way. Every scientific discovery
in embryo presents that double aspect—a monster in
the fœtus, a marvel in the germ.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
