<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1-3" id="chapter-1-3-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>IX</h4>

<h5>THE MAN WHO DISCOVERED RANTAINE'S CHARACTER</h5>


<p>As long as Mess Lethierry had been able to do duty, he had
commanded the Durande, and had had no other pilot or captain
but himself; but a time had come, as we have said, when he
had been compelled to find a successor. He had chosen for
that purpose Sieur Clubin, of Torteval, a taciturn man. Sieur
Clubin had a character upon the coast for strict probity. He
became the <i>alter ego</i>, the double, of Mess Lethierry.</p>

<p>Sieur Clubin, although he had rather the look of a notary
than of a sailor, was a mariner of rare skill. He had all the
talents which are required to meet dangers of every kind. He
was a skilful stower, a safe man aloft, an able and careful boatswain,
a powerful steersman, an experienced pilot, and a bold
captain. He was prudent, and he carried his prudence sometimes
to the point of daring, which is a great quality at sea.
His natural apprehensiveness of danger was tempered by a
strong instinct of what was possible in an emergency. He was
one of those mariners who will face risks to a point perfectly
well known to themselves, and who generally manage to come
successfully out of every peril. Every certainty which a man
can command, dealing with so fickle an element as the sea, he
possessed. Sieur Clubin, moreover, was a renowned swimmer;
he was one of that race of men broken into the buffeting of the
waves, who can remain as long as they please in the water—who
can start from the Havre-des-Pas at Jersey, double the
Colettes, swim round the Hermitage and Castle Elizabeth, and
return in two hours to the point from which they started. He
came from Torteval, where he had the reputation of often having
swum across the passage so much dreaded, from the Hanway
rocks to the point of Pleinmont.</p>

<p>One circumstance which had recommended Sieur Clubin to
Mess Lethierry more than any other, was his having judged
correctly the character of Rantaine. He had pointed out to
Lethierry the dishonesty of the man, and had said "Rantaine
will rob you." His prediction was verified. More than once—in
matters, it is true, not very important—Mess Lethierry had
put his ever-scrupulous honesty to the proof; and he freely
communicated with him on the subject of his affairs. Mess
Lethierry used to say, "A good conscience expects to be treated
with perfect confidence."</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
