<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2-1" id="chapter-2-1-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>XI</h4>

<h5>DISCOVERY</h5>


<p>A rock near the coast is sometimes visited by men; a rock
in mid-ocean never. What object could any one have there?
No supplies can be drawn thence; no fruit-trees are there, no
pasturage, no beasts, no springs of water fitted for man's use.
It stands aloft, a rock with its steep sides and summits above
water, and its sharp points below. Nothing is to be found
there but inevitable shipwreck.</p>

<p>This kind of rocks, which in the old sea dialect were called
<i>Isolés</i>, are, as we have said, strange places. The sea is alone
there; she works her own will. No token of terrestrial life
disturbs her. Man is a terror to the sea; she is shy of his
approach, and hides from him her deeds. But she is bolder
among the lone sea rocks. The everlasting soliloquy of the
waves is not troubled there. She labours at the rock, repairs
its damage, sharpens its peaks, makes them rugged or renews
them. She pierces the granite, wears down the soft stone, and
denudes the hard; she rummages, dismembers, bores, perforates,
and grooves; she fills the rock with cells, and makes it sponge-like,
hollows out the inside, or sculptures it without. In that
secret mountain which is hers, she makes to herself caves,
sanctuaries, palaces. She has her splendid and monstrous
vegetation, composed of floating plants which bite, and of
monsters which take root; and she hides away all this terrible
magnificence in the twilight of her deeps. Among the isolated
rocks no eye watches over her; no spy embarrasses her movements.
It is there that she develops at liberty her mysterious
side, which is inaccessible to man. Here she keeps all strange
secretions of life. Here that the unknown wonders of the sea
are assembled.</p>

<p>Promontories, forelands, capes, headlands, breakers, and
shoals are veritable constructions. The geological changes of
the earth are trifling compared with the vast operations of the
ocean. These breakers, these habitations in the sea, these
pyramids, and spouts of the foam are the practicers of a
mysterious art which the author of this book has somewhere
called "the Art of Nature." Their style is known by its vastness.
The effects of chance seem here design. Its works are
multiform. They abound in the mazy entanglement of the
rock-coral groves, the sublimity of the cathedral, the extravagance
of the pagoda, the amplitude of the mountain, the
delicacy of the jeweller's work, the horror of the sepulchre.
They are filled with cells like the wasps' nest, with dens like
menageries, with subterranean passages like the haunts of moles,
with dungeons like Bastiles, with ambuscades like a camp.
They have their doors, but they are barricaded; their columns,
but they are shattered; their towers, but they are tottering;
their bridges, but they are broken. Their compartments are
unaccommodating; these are fitted for the birds only, those
only for fish. They are impassable. Their architectural style
is variable and inconsistent; it regards or disregards at will the
laws of equilibrium, breaks off, stops short, begins in the form
of an archivolt, and ends in an architrave, block on block.
Enceladus is the mason. A wondrous science of dynamics
exhibits here its problems ready solved. Fearful overhanging
blocks threaten, but fall not: the human mind cannot guess
what power supports their bewildering masses. Blind entrances,
gaps, and ponderous suspensions multiply and vary
infinitely. The laws which regulate this Babel baffle human
induction. The great unknown architect plans nothing, but
succeeds in all. Rocks massed together in confusion form a
monstrous monument, defy reason, yet maintain equilibrium.
Here is something more than strength; it is eternity. But
order is wanting. The wild tumult of the waves seems to have
passed into the wilderness of stone. It is like a tempest petrified
and fixed for ever. Nothing is more impressive than that wild
architecture; always standing, yet always seeming to fall; in
which everything appears to give support, and yet to withdraw
it. A struggle between opposing lines has resulted in the construction
of an edifice, filled with traces of the efforts of those
old antagonists, the ocean and the storm.</p>

<p>This architecture has its terrible masterpieces, of which the
Douvres rock was one.</p>

<p>The sea had fashioned and perfected it with a sinister solicitude.
The snarling waters licked it into shape. It was hideous,
treacherous, dark, full of hollows.</p>

<p>It had a complete system of submarine caverns ramifying and
losing themselves in unfathomed depths. Some of the orifices
of this labyrinth of passages were left exposed by the low tides.
A man might enter there, but at his risk and peril.</p>

<p>Gilliatt determined to explore all these grottoes, for the
purpose of his salvage labour. There was not one which was
not repulsive. Everywhere about the caverns that strange
aspect of an abattoir, those singular traces of slaughter, appeared
again in all the exaggeration of the ocean. No one who
has not seen in excavations of this kind, upon the walls of everlasting
granite, these hideous natural frescoes, can form a
notion of their singularity.</p>

<p>These pitiless caverns, too, were false and sly. Woe betide
him who would loiter there. The rising tide filled them to
their roofs.</p>

<p>Rock limpets and edible mosses abounded among them.</p>

<p>They were obstructed by quantities of shingle, heaped
together in their recesses. Some of their huge smooth stones
weighed more than a ton. They were of every proportion, and
of every hue; but the greater part were blood coloured. Some,
covered with a hairy and glutinous seaweed, seemed like large
green moles boring a way into the rock.</p>

<p>Several of the caverns terminated abruptly in the form of a
demi-cupola. Others, main arteries of a mysterious circulation,
lengthened out in the rock in dark and tortuous fissures.
They were the alleys of the submarine city; but they gradually
contracted from their entrances, and at length left no way for
a man to pass. Peering in by the help of a lighted torch, he
could see nothing but dark hollows dripping with moisture.</p>

<p>One day, Gilliatt, exploring, ventured into one of these
fissures. The state of the tide favoured the attempt. It was
a beautiful day of calm and sunshine. There was no fear of
any accident from the sea to increase the danger.</p>

<p>Two necessities, as we have said, compelled him to undertake
these explorations. He had to gather fragments of wreck and
other things to aid him in his labour, and to search for crabs
and crayfish for his food. Shell-fish had begun to fail him on
the rocks.</p>

<p>The fissure was narrow, and the passage difficult. Gilliatt
could see daylight beyond. He made an effort, contorted
himself as much as he could, and penetrated into the cave as
far as he was able.</p>

<p>He had reached, without suspecting it, the interior of the
rock, upon the point of which Clubin had steered the Durande.
Though abrupt and almost inaccessible without, it was hollowed
within. It was full of galleries, pits, and chambers, like the
tomb of an Egyptian king. This network of caverns was one
of the most complicated of all that labyrinth, a labour of the
water, the undermining of the restless sea. The branches of
the subterranean maze probably communicated with the sea
without by more than one issue, some gaping at the level of the
waves, the others profound and invisible. It was near here,
but Gilliatt knew it not, that Clubin had dived into the sea.</p>

<p>In this crocodile cave—where crocodiles, it is true, were not
among the dangers—Gilliatt wound about, clambered, struck
his head occasionally, bent low and rose again, lost his footing
and regained it many times, advancing laboriously. By
degrees the gallery widened; a glimmer of daylight appeared,
and he found himself suddenly at the entrance to a cavern of a
singular kind.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
