<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V: The Fatal Difference Between Six Inches and Two Feet</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2-4" id="chapter-2-4-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h4>
				<h5 epub:type="title">The Fatal Difference Between Six Inches and Two Feet</h5>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Gilliatt replaced the box in the girdle, and placed the girdle in the pocket of his trousers.</p>
			<p>He left the skeleton among the crabs, with the remains of the devilfish beside it.</p>
			<p>While he had been occupied with the devilfish and the skeleton, the rising tide had submerged the entrance to the cave. He was only enabled to leave it by plunging under the arched entrance. He got through without difficulty; for he knew the entrance well, and was master of these gymnastics in the sea.</p>
			<p>It is easy to understand the drama which had taken place there during the ten weeks preceding. One monster had preyed upon another; the devilfish had seized Clubin.</p>
			<p>These two embodiments of treachery had met in the inexorable darkness. There had been an encounter at the bottom of the sea between these two compounds of mystery and watchfulness; the monster had destroyed the man: a horrible fulfilment of justice.</p>
			<p>The crab feeds on carrion, the devilfish on crabs. The devilfish seizes as it passes any swimming animal⁠—an otter, a dog, a man if it can⁠—sucks the blood, and leaves the body at the bottom of the water. The crabs are the spider-formed scavengers of the sea. Putrefying flesh attracts them; they crowd round it, devour the body, and are in their turn consumed by the devilfish. Dead creatures disappear in the crab, the crab disappears in the pieuvre. This is the law which we have already pointed out.</p>
			<p>The devilfish had laid hold of him, and drowned him. Some wave had carried his body into the cave, and deposited it at the extremity of the inner cavern, where Gilliatt had discovered it.</p>
			<p>He returned searching among the rocks for sea-urchins and limpets. He had no desire for crabs; to have eaten them now would have seemed to him like feeding upon human flesh.</p>
			<p>For the rest, he thought of nothing but of eating what he could before starting. Nothing now interposed to prevent his departure. Great tempests are always followed by a calm, which lasts sometimes several days. There was, therefore, no danger from the sea. Gilliatt had resolved to leave the rocks on the following day. It was important, on account of the tide, to keep the barrier between the two Douvres during the night, but he intended to remove it at daybreak, to push the sloop out to sea, and set sail for <abbr>St.</abbr> Sampson. The light breeze which was blowing came from the southwest, which was precisely the wind which he would want.</p>
			<p>It was in the first quarter of the moon, in the month of May; the days were long.</p>
			<p>When Gilliatt, having finished his wanderings among the rocks, and appeased his appetite to some extent, returned to the passage between the two Douvres, where he had left the sloop, the sun had set, the twilight was increased by that pale light which comes from a crescent moon; the tide had attained its height, and was beginning to ebb. The funnel standing upright above the sloop had been covered by the foam during the tempest with a coating of salt which glittered white in the light of the moon.</p>
			<p>This circumstance reminded Gilliatt that the storm had inundated the sloop, both with surf and rainwater, and that if he meant to start in the morning, it would be necessary to bail it out.</p>
			<p>Before leaving to go in quest of crabs, he had ascertained that it had about six inches of water in the hold. The scoop which he used for the purpose would, he thought, be sufficient for throwing the water overboard.</p>
			<p>On arriving at the barrier, Gilliatt was struck with terror. There were nearly two feet of water in the sloop. A terrible discovery; the bark had sprung a leak.</p>
			<p>She had been making water gradually during his absence. Burdened as she was, two feet of water was a perilous addition. A little more, and she must inevitably founder. If he had returned but an hour later, he would probably have found nothing above water but the funnel and the mast.</p>
			<p>There was not a minute to be lost in deliberation. It was absolutely necessary to find the leakage, stop it, and then empty the vessel, or at all events, lighten it. The pumps of the Durande had been lost in the breakup of the wreck. He was reduced to use the scoop of the bark.</p>
			<p>To find the leak was the most urgent necessity.</p>
			<p>Gilliatt set to work immediately, and without even giving himself time to dress. He shivered; but he no longer felt either hunger or cold.</p>
			<p>The water continued to gain upon his vessel. Fortunately there was no wind. The slightest swell would have been fatal.</p>
			<p>The moon went down.</p>
			<p>Bent low, and plunged in the water deeper than his waist he groped about for a long time. He discovered the mischief at last.</p>
			<p>During the gale, at the critical moment when the sloop had swerved, the strong bark had bumped and grazed rather violently on the rocks. One of the projections of the Little Douvre had made a fracture in the starboard side of the hull.</p>
			<p>The leak unluckily⁠—it might almost have been said, maliciously⁠—had been made near the joint of the two riders, a fact which, joined with the fury of the hurricane, had prevented him perceiving it during his dark and rapid survey in the height of the storm.</p>
			<p>The fracture was alarming on account of its size; but fortunately, although the vessel was sunk lower than usual by the weight of water, it was still above the ordinary waterline.</p>
			<p>At the moment when the accident had occurred, the waves had rolled heavily into the defile, and had flooded through the breach; and the vessel had sunk a few inches under the additional weight, so that, even after the subsidence of the water, the weight having raised the waterline, had kept the hole still under the surface. Hence the imminence of the danger. But if he could succeed in stopping the leak, he could empty the sloop; the hole once staunched, the vessel would rise to its usual waterline, the fracture would be above water, and in this position the repair would be easy, or at least possible. He had still, as we have already said, his carpenters’ tools in good condition.</p>
			<p>But meanwhile what uncertainty must he not endure! What perils, what chances of accidents! He heard the water rising inexorably. One shock, and all would have perished. What misery seemed in store for him. Perhaps his endeavours were even now too late.</p>
			<p>He reproached himself bitterly. He thought that he ought to have seen the damage immediately. The six inches of water in the hold ought to have suggested it to him. He had been stupid enough to attribute these six inches of water to the rain and the foam. He was angry with himself for having slept and eaten; he taxed himself even with his weariness, and almost with the storm and the dark night. All seemed to him to have been his own fault.</p>
			<p>These bitter self-reproaches filled his mind while engaged in his labour, but they did not prevent his considering well the work he was engaged in.</p>
			<p>The leak had been found; that was the first step: to staunch it was the second. That was all that was possible for the moment. Joinery work cannot be carried on under water.</p>
			<p>It was a favourable circumstance that the breach in the hull was in the space between the two chains which held the funnel fast on the starboard side. The stuffing with which it was necessary to stop it could be fixed to these chains.</p>
			<p>The water meanwhile was gaining. Its depth was now between two and three feet; and it reached above his knees.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
