<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1-3" id="chapter-1-3-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>II</h4>

<h5>THE OLD STORY OF UTOPIA</h5>


<p>A steamboat was a prodigious novelty in the waters of the
Channel in 182-. The whole coast of Normandy was long
strangely excited by it. Now-a-days, ten or a dozen steam
vessels, crossing and recrossing within the bounds of the
horizon, scarcely attract a glance from loiterers on the shore.
At the most, some persons, whose interest or business it is to
note such things, will observe the indications in their smoke of
whether they burn Welsh or Newcastle coal. They pass, and
that is all. "Welcome," if coming home; "a pleasant passage,"
if outward bound.</p>

<p>Folks were less calm on the subject of these wonderful inventions
in the first quarter of the present century; and the new
and strange machines, and their long lines of smoke regarded
with no good-will by the Channel Islanders. In that Puritanical
Archipelago, where the Queen of England has been censured
for violating the Scriptures<a name="FNanchor_2_2" id="FNanchor_2_2"></a><a href="#Footnote_2_2" class="fnanchor">[2]</a> by using chloroform during her
accouchments, the first steam-vessel which made its appearance
received the name of the "Devil Boat." In the eyes of these
worthy fishermen, once Catholics, now Calvinists, but always
bigots, it seemed to be a portion of the infernal regions which
had been somehow set afloat. A local preacher selected for his
discourse the question of "Whether man has the right to make
fire and water work together when God had divided them.<a name="FNanchor_3_3" id="FNanchor_3_3"></a><a href="#Footnote_3_3" class="fnanchor">[3]</a>
This beast, composed of iron and fire, did it not resemble
Leviathan? Was it not an attempt to bring chaos again into
the universe? This is not the only occasion on which the progress
of civilisation has been stigmatised as a return to chaos.</p>

<p>"A mad notion—a gross delusion—an absurdity!" Such
was the verdict of the Academy of Sciences when consulted by
Napoleon on the subject of steamboats, early in the present
century. The poor fishermen of St. Sampson may be excused
for not being, in scientific matters, any wiser than the mathematicians
of Paris; and in religious matters, a little island like
Guernsey is not bound to be more enlightened than a great
continent like America. In the year 1807, when the first
steamboat of Fulton, commanded by Livingston, furnished
with one of Watt's engines, sent from England, and manœuvred,
besides her ordinary crew, by two Frenchmen only, André
Michaux and another, made her first voyage from New York to
Albany, it happened that she set sail on the 17th of August.
The Methodists took up this important fact, and in numberless
chapels, preachers were heard calling down a malediction on
the machine, and declaring that this number 17 was no other
than the total of the ten horns and seven heads of the beast of
the Apocalypse. In America, they invoked against the steamboats
the beast from the book of Revelation; in Europe, the
reptile of the book of Genesis. This was the simple difference.</p>

<p>The savants had rejected steamboats as impossible; the
priests had anathematised them as impious. Science had condemned,
and religion consigned them to perdition. Fulton
was a new incarnation of Lucifer. The simple people on the
coasts and in the villages were confirmed in their prejudice by
the uneasiness which they felt at the outlandish sight. The
religious view of steamboats may be summed up as follows:
Water and fire were divorced at the creation. This divorce was
enjoined by God himself. Man has no right to join what his
Maker has put asunder; to reunite what he has disunited. The
peasants' view was simply, "I don't like the look of this thing."</p>

<p>No one but Mess Lethierry, perhaps, could have been found
at that early period daring enough to dream of such an enterprise
as the establishment of a steam-vessel between Guernsey
and St. Malo. He, alone, as an independent thinker, was
capable of conceiving such an idea, or, as a hardy mariner, of
carrying it out. The French part of his nature, probably, conceived
the idea; the English part supplied the energy to put it
in execution.</p>

<p>How and when this was, we are about to inform the reader.</p>

<div class="footnotes"><h3>FOOTNOTES:</h3>

<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_2_2" id="Footnote_2_2"></a><a href="#FNanchor_2_2"><span class="label">[2]</span></a> Genesis, chap. iii. v. 16.</p></div>

<div class="footnote"><p><a name="Footnote_3_3" id="Footnote_3_3"></a><a href="#FNanchor_3_3"><span class="label">[3]</span></a> Genesis, chap. i. v. 4.</p></div>
</div>


<hr style="width: 65%;" />
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
