<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2-2" id="chapter-2-2-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>IV</h4>

<h5>SUB RE</h5>


<p>The aspect of the man who accomplished all these labours
became terrible.</p>

<p>Gilliatt in his multifarious tasks expended all his strength
at once, and regained it with difficulty.</p>

<p>Privations on the one hand, lassitude on the other, had much
reduced him. His hair and beard had grown long. He had
but one shirt which was not in rags. He went about bare-footed,
the wind having carried away one of his shoes and the
sea the other. Fractures of the rude and dangerous stone anvil
which he used had left small wounds upon his hands and arms,
the marks of labour. These wounds, or rather scratches, were
superficial; but the keen air and the salt sea irritated them
continually.</p>

<p>He was generally hungry, thirsty, and cold.</p>

<p>His store of fresh water was gone; his rye-meal was used or
eaten. He had nothing left but a little biscuit.</p>

<p>This he broke with his teeth, having no water in which to
steep it.</p>

<p>By little and little, and day by day, his powers decreased.</p>

<p>The terrible rocks were consuming his existence.</p>

<p>How to obtain food was a problem; how to get drink was
a problem; how to find rest was a problem.</p>

<p>He ate when he was fortunate enough to find a crayfish or a
crab; he drank when he chanced to see a sea-bird descend upon
a point of rock; for on climbing up to the spot he generally
found there a hollow with a little fresh water. He drank from
it after the bird; sometimes with the bird; for the gulls and
seamews had become accustomed to him, and no longer flew
away at his approach. Even in his greatest need of food he did
not attempt to molest them. He had, as will be remembered,
a superstition about birds. The birds on their part—now that
his hair was rough and wild and his beard long—had no fear of
him. The change in his face gave them confidence; he had lost
resemblance to men, and taken the form of the wild beast.</p>

<p>The birds and Gilliatt, in fact, had become good friends.
Companions in poverty, they helped each other. As long as
he had had any meal, he had crumbled for them some little bits
of the cakes he made. In his deeper distress they showed him
in their turn the places where he might find the little pools of
water.</p>

<p>He ate the shell-fish raw. Shell-fish help in a certain degree
to quench the thirst. The crabs he cooked. Having no kettle,
he roasted them between two stones made red-hot in his fire,
after the manner of the savages of the Feroe islands.</p>

<p>Meanwhile signs of the equinoctial season had begun to
appear. There came rain—an angry rain. No showers or
steady torrents, but fine, sharp, icy, penetrating points which
pierced to his skin through his clothing, and to his bones through
his skin. It was a rain which yielded little water for drinking,
but which drenched him none the less.</p>

<p>Chary of assistance, prodigal of misery—such was the character
of these rains. During one week Gilliatt suffered from
them all day and all night.</p>

<p>At night, in his rocky recess, nothing but the overpowering
fatigue of his daily work enabled him to get sleep. The great
sea-gnats stung him, and he awakened covered with blisters.</p>

<p>He had a kind of low fever, which sustained him; this fever
is a succour which destroys. By instinct he chewed the mosses,
or sucked the leaves of wild cochlearia, scanty tufts of which
grew in the dry crevices of the rocks. Of his suffering, however,
he took little heed. He had no time to spare from his work
to the consideration of his own privations. The rescue of the
machinery of the Durande was progressing well. That sufficed
for him.</p>

<p>Every now and then, for the necessities of his work, he
jumped into the water, swam to some point, and gained a footing
again. He simply plunged into the sea and left it, as a man
passes from one room in his dwelling to another.</p>

<p>His clothing was never dry. It was saturated with rain
water, which had no time to evaporate, and with sea water,
which never dries. He lived perpetually wet.</p>

<p>Living in wet clothing is a habit which may be acquired.
The poor groups of Irish people—old men, mothers, girls
almost naked, and infants—who pass the winter in the open air,
under the snow and rain, huddled together, sometimes at the
corners of houses in the streets of London, live and die in this
condition.</p>

<p>To be soaked with wet, and yet to be thirsty: Gilliatt grew
familiar with this strange torture. There were times when he
was glad to suck the sleeve of his loose coat.</p>

<p>The fire which he made scarcely warmed him. A fire in open
air yields little comfort. It burns on one side, and freezes on
the other.</p>

<p>Gilliatt often shivered even while sweating over his forge.</p>

<p>Everywhere about him rose resistance amidst a terrible
silence. He felt himself the enemy of an unseen combination.
There is a dismal <i>non possumus</i> in nature. The inertia of
matter is like a sullen threat. A mysterious persecution environed
him. He suffered from heats and shiverings. The
fire ate into his flesh; the water froze him; feverish thirst
tormented him; the wind tore his clothing; hunger undermined
the organs of the body. The oppression of all these
things was constantly exhausting him. Obstacles silent,
immense, seemed to converge from all points, with the blind
irresponsibility of fate, yet full of a savage unanimity. He
felt them pressing inexorably upon him. No means were there
of escaping from them. His sufferings produced the impression
of some living persecutor. He had a constant sense of something
working against him, of a hostile form ever present, ever
labouring to circumvent and to subdue him. He could have
fled from the struggle; but since he remained, he had no choice
but to war with this impenetrable hostility. He asked himself
what it was. It took hold of him, grasped him tightly, overpowered
him, deprived him of breath. The invisible persecutor
was destroying him by slow degrees. Every day the
oppression became greater, as if a mysterious screw had received
another turn.</p>

<p>His situation in this dreadful spot resembled a duel, in which
a suspicion of some treachery haunts the mind of one of the
combatants.</p>

<p>Now it seemed a coalition of obscure forces which surrounded
him. He felt that there was somewhere a determination to be
rid of his presence. It is thus that the glacier chases the
loitering ice-block.</p>

<p>Almost without seeming to touch him this latent coalition
had reduced him to rags; had left him bleeding, distressed, and,
as it were, <i>hors de combat</i>, even before the battle. He laboured,
indeed, not the less—without pause or rest; but as the work
advanced, the workman himself lost ground. It might have
been fancied that Nature, dreading his bold spirit, adopted the
plan of slowly undermining his bodily power. Gilliatt kept his
ground, and left the rest to the future. The sea had begun by
consuming him; what would come next?</p>

<p>The double Douvres—that dragon made of granite, and
lying in ambush in mid-ocean—had sheltered him. It had
allowed him to enter, and to do his will; but its hospitality
resembled the welcome of devouring jaws.</p>

<p>The desert, the boundless surface, the unfathomable space
around him and above, so full of negatives to man's will; the
mute, inexorable determination of phenomena following their
appointed course; the grand general law of things, implacable
and passive; the ebbs and flows; the rocks themselves, dark
Pleiades whose points were each a star amid vortices, a centre
of an irradiation of currents; the strange, indefinable conspiracy
to stifle with indifference the temerity of a living being;
the wintry winds, the clouds, and the beleaguering waves
enveloped him, closed round him slowly, and in a measure shut
him in, and separated him from companionship, like a dungeon
built up by degrees round a living man. All against him;
nothing for him; he felt himself isolated, abandoned, enfeebled,
sapped, forgotten. His storehouse empty, his tools broken or
defective; he was tormented with hunger and thirst by day,
with cold by night. His sufferings had left him with wounds
and tatters, rags covering sores, torn hands, bleeding feet,
wasted limbs, pallid cheeks, and eyes bright with a strange
light; but this was the steady flame of his determination.</p>

<p>The virtue of a man is betrayed by his eyes. How much of
the man there is in us may be read in their depths. We make
ourselves known by the light that gleams beneath our brows.
The petty natures wink at us, the larger send forth flashes. If
there is no brilliancy under the lids, there is no thought in the
brain, no love in the heart. Those who love desire, and those
who desire sparkle and flash. Determination gives a fire to the
glance, a magnificent fire that consumes all timid thoughts.</p>

<p>It is the self-willed ones who are sublime. He who is only
brave, has but a passing fit, he who is only valiant has temperament
and nothing more, he who is courageous has but one
virtue. He who persists in the truth is the grand character.
The secret of great hearts may be summed up in the word:
Perseverando. Perseverance is to courage what the wheel is to
the lever; it is the continual renewing of the centre of support.
Let the desired goal be on earth or in heaven, only make for the
goal. Everything is in that; in the first case one is a Columbus,
in the second a god. Not to allow conscience to argue or the
will to fail—this is the way to suffering and glory. In the world
of ethics to fall does not exclude the possibility of soaring,
rather does it give impetus to flight. The mediocrities allow
themselves to be dissuaded by the specious obstacles—the great
ones never. To perish is their perhaps, to conquer their conviction.
You may propose many good reasons to the martyr
why he should not allow himself to be stoned to death. Disdain
of every reasonable objection begets that sublime victory of
the vanquished which we call martyrdom.</p>

<p>All his efforts seemed to tend to the impossible. His success
was trifling and slow. He was compelled to expend much
labour for very little results. This it was that gave to his
struggle its noble and pathetic character.</p>

<p>That it should have required so many preparations, so much
toil, so many cautious experiments, such nights of hardship,
and such days of danger, merely to set up four beams over a
shipwrecked vessel, to divide and isolate the portion that could
be saved, and to adjust to that wreck within a wreck four tackle-blocks
with their cables was only the result of his solitary
labour. Fate had decreed him the work, and necessity obliged
him to carry it out.</p>

<p>That solitary position Gilliatt had more than accepted; he
had deliberately chosen it. Dreading a competitor, because a
competitor might have proved a rival, he had sought for no
assistance. The overwhelming enterprise, the risk, the danger,
the toil multiplied by itself, the possible destruction of the
salvor in his work, famine, fever, nakedness, distress—he had
chosen all these for himself! Such was his selfishness. He
was like a man placed in some terrible chamber which is being
slowly exhausted of air. His vitality was leaving him by little
and little. He scarcely perceived it.</p>

<p>Exhaustion of the bodily strength does not necessarily
exhaust the will. Faith is only a secondary power; the will is
the first. The mountains, which faith is proverbially said to
move, are nothing beside that which the will can accomplish.
All that Gilliatt lost in vigour, he gained in tenacity. The
destruction of the physical man under the oppressive influence
of that wild surrounding sea, and rock, and sky, seemed only to
reinvigorate his moral nature.</p>

<p>Gilliatt felt no fatigue; or, rather, would not yield to any.
The refusal of the mind to recognise the failings of the body is
in itself an immense power.</p>

<p>He saw nothing, except the steps in the progress of his
labours.</p>

<p>His object—now seeming so near attainment—wrapped him
in perpetual illusions.</p>

<p>He endured all this suffering without any other thought than
is comprised in the word "Forward." His work flew to his
head; the strength of the will is intoxicating. Its intoxication
is called heroism.</p>

<p>He had become a kind of Job, having the ocean for the scene
of his sufferings. But he was a Job wrestling with difficulty, a
Job combating and making head against afflictions; a Job conquering!
a combination of Job and Prometheus, if such names
are not too great to be applied to a poor sailor and fisher of crabs
and crayfish.</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
