<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1-3" id="chapter-1-3-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>XIII</h4>

<h5>THOUGHTLESSNESS ADDS A GRACE TO BEAUTY</h5>


<p>A word once said, Mess Lethierry remembered it: a word once
said, Déruchette soon forgot it. Here was another difference
between the uncle and the niece.</p>

<p>Brought up in the peculiar way already described, Déruchette
was little accustomed to responsibility. There is a latent
danger in an education not sufficiently serious, which cannot be
too much insisted on. It is perhaps unwise to endeavour to
make a child happy too soon.</p>

<p>So long as she was happy, Déruchette thought all was well.
She knew, too, that it was always a pleasure to her uncle to
see her pleased. The religious sentiment in her nature was
satisfied with going to the parish church four times in the year.
We have seen her in her Christmas-day toilet. Of life, she was
entirely ignorant. She had a disposition which one day might
lead her to love passionately. Meanwhile she was contented.</p>

<p>She sang by fits and starts, chatted by fits and starts, enjoyed
the hour as it passed, fulfilled some little duty, and was gone
again, and was delightful in all. Add to all this the English
sort of liberty which she enjoyed. In England the very infants
go alone, girls are their own mistresses, and adolescence is
almost wholly unrestrained. Such are the differences of
manners. Later, how many of these free maidens become
female slaves? I use the word in its least odious sense; I
mean that they are free in the development of their nature,
but slaves to duty.</p>

<p>Déruchette awoke every morning with little thought of her
actions of the day before. It would have troubled her a good
deal to have had to give an account of how she had spent her
time the previous week. All this, however, did not prevent
her having certain hours of strange disquietude; times when
some dark cloud seemed to pass over the brightness of her joy.
Those azure depths are subject to such shadows! But clouds
like these soon passed away. She quickly shook off such moods
with a cheerful laugh, knowing neither why she had been sad,
nor why she had regained her serenity. She was always at
play. As a child, she would take delight in teasing the passers-by.
She played practical jokes upon the boys. If the fiend
himself had passed that way, she would hardly have spared
him some ingenious trick. She was pretty and innocent; and
she could abuse the immunity accorded to such qualities. She
was ready with a smile, as a cat with a stroke of her claws. So
much the worse for the victim of her scratches. She thought
no more of them. Yesterday had no existence for her. She
lived in the fullness of to-day. Such it is to have too much
happiness fall to one's lot! With Déruchette impressions
vanished like the melted snow.</p>


		</section>
	</body>
</html>
