<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2-1" id="chapter-2-1-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>X</h4>

<h5>THE FORGE</h5>


<p>The warehouse completed, Gilliatt constructed his forge.</p>

<p>The other recess which he had chosen had within it a species
of passage like a gallery in a mine of pretty good depth. He
had had at first an idea of making this his lodging, but the
draught was so continuous and so persevering in this passage
that he had been compelled to give it up. This current of air,
incessantly renewed, first gave him the notion of the forge.
Since it could not be his chamber, he was determined that this
cabin should be his smithy. To bend obstacles to our purposes
is a great step towards triumph. The wind was Gilliatt's
enemy. He had set about making it his servant.</p>

<p>The proverb applied to certain kinds of men—"Fit for everything,
good for nothing"—may also be applied to the hollows
of rocks. They give no advantages gratuitously. On one side
we find a hollow fashioned conveniently in the shape of a bath;
but it allows the water to run away through a fissure. Here is
a rocky chamber, but without a roof; here a bed of moss, but
oozy with wet; here an arm-chair, but one of hard stone.</p>

<p>The forge which Gilliatt intended was roughly sketched out
by nature; but nothing could be more troublesome than to
reduce this rough sketch to manageable shape, to transform
this cavern into a laboratory and smith's shop. With three or
four large rocks, shaped like a funnel, and ending in a narrow
fissure, chance had constructed there a species of vast ill-shapen
blower, of very different power to those huge old forge bellows
of fourteen feet long, which poured out at every breath ninety-eight
thousand inches of air. This was quite a different sort
of construction. The proportions of the hurricane cannot be
definitely measured.</p>

<p>This excess of force was an embarrassment. The incessant
draught was difficult to regulate.</p>

<p>The cavern had two inconveniences; the wind traversed it
from end to end; so did the water.</p>

<p>This was not the water of the sea, but a continual little
trickling stream, more like a spring than a torrent.</p>

<p>The foam, cast incessantly by the surf upon the rocks and
sometimes more than a hundred feet in the air, had filled with
sea water a natural cave situated among the high rocks overlooking
the excavation. The overflowings of this reservoir
caused, a little behind the escarpment, a fall of water of about
an inch in breadth, and descending four or five fathoms. An
occasional contribution from the rains also helped to fill the
reservoir. From time to time a passing cloud dropped a shower
into the rocky basin, always overflowing. The water was
brackish, and unfit to drink, but clear. This rill of water fell
in graceful drops from the extremities of the long marine
grasses, as from the ends of a length of hair.</p>

<p>He was struck with the idea of making this water serve to
regulate the draught in the cave. By the means of a funnel
made of planks roughly and hastily put together to form two
or three pipes, one of which was fitted with a valve, and of
a large tub arranged as a lower reservoir, without checks or
counterweight, and completed solely by air-tight stuffing above
and air-holes below, Gilliatt, who, as we have already said, was
handy at the forge and at the mechanic's bench, succeeded in
constructing, instead of the forge-bellows, which he did not
possess, an apparatus less perfect than what is known now-a-days
by the name of a "cagniardelle," but less rude than what
the people of the Pyrenees anciently called a "trompe."</p>

<p>He had some rye-meal, and he manufactured with it some
paste. He had also some white rope, which picked out into tow.
With this paste and tow, and some bits of wood, he stopped all
the crevices of the rock, leaving only a little air passage made
of a powder-flask which he had found aboard the Durande, and
which had served for loading the signal gun. This powder-flask
was directed horizontally to a large stone, which Gilliatt
made the hearth of the forge. A stopper made of a piece of
tow served to close it in case of need.</p>

<p>After this, he heaped up the wood and coal upon the hearth,
struck his steel against the bare rock, caught a spark upon a
handful of loose tow, and having ignited it, soon lighted his
forge fire.</p>

<p>He tried the blower: it worked well.</p>

<p>Gilliatt felt the pride of a Cyclops: he was the master of air,
water, and fire. Master of the air; for he had given a kind of lungs
to the wind, and changed the rude draught into a useful blower.
Master of water, for he had converted the little cascade into a
"trompe." Master of fire, for out of this moist rock he had
struck a flame.</p>

<p>The cave being almost everywhere open to the sky, the smoke
issued freely, blackening the curved escarpment. The rocks
which seemed destined for ever to receive only the white foam,
became now familiar with the blackening smoke.</p>

<p>Gilliatt selected for an anvil a large smooth round stone, of
about the required shape and dimensions. It formed a base
for the blows of his hammer; but one that might fly and was
very dangerous. One of the extremities of this block, rounded
and ending in a point, might, for want of anything better, serve
instead of a conoid bicorn; but the other kind of bicorn of
the pyramidal form was wanting. It was the ancient stone
anvil of the Troglodytes. The surface, polished by the waves,
had almost the firmness of steel.</p>

<p>He regretted not having brought his anvil. As he did not
know that the Durande had been broken in two by the tempest,
he had hoped to find the carpenter's chest and all his tools
generally kept in the forehold. But it was precisely the fore-part
of the vessel which had been carried away.</p>

<p>These two excavations which he had found in the rock were
contiguous. The warehouse and the forge communicated with
each other.</p>

<p>Every evening, when his work was ended, he supped on a
little biscuit, moistened in water, a sea-urchin or a crab, or a
few <i>châtaignes de mer</i>, the only food to be found among those
rocks; and shivering like his knotted cord, mounted again to
sleep in his cell upon the Great Douvre.</p>

<p>The very materialism of his daily occupation increased the
kind of abstraction in which he lived. To be steeped too deeply
in realities is in itself a cause of visionary moods. His bodily
labour, with its infinite variety of details, detracted nothing
from the sensation of stupor which arose from the strangeness of
his position and his work. Ordinary bodily fatigue is a thread
which binds man to the earth; but the very peculiarity of the
enterprise he was engaged in kept him in a sort of ideal twilight
region. There were times when he seemed to be striking blows
with his hammer in the clouds. At other moments his tools
appeared to him like arms. He had a singular feeling, as if
he was repressing or providing against some latent danger of
attack. Untwisting ropes, unravelling threads of yarn in a
sail, or propping up a couple of beams, appeared to him at such
times like fashioning engines of war. The thousand minute
pains which he took about his salvage operations produced at
last in his mind the effect of precautions against aggressions
little concealed, and easy to anticipate. He did not know the
words which express the ideas, but he perceived them. His
instincts became less and less those of the worker; his habits
more and more those of the savage man.</p>

<p>His business there was to subdue and direct the powers of
nature. He had an indistinct perception of it. A strange
enlargement of his ideas!</p>

<p>Around him, far as eye could reach, was the vast prospect of
endless labour wasted and lost. Nothing is more disturbing to
the mind than the contemplation of the diffusion of forces at
work in the unfathomable and illimitable space of the ocean.
The mind tends naturally to seek the object of these forces.
The unceasing movement in space, the unwearying sea, the
clouds that seem ever hurrying somewhere, the vast mysterious
prodigality of effort, all this is a problem. Whither does this
perpetual movement tend? What do these winds construct?
What do these giant blows build up? These howlings, shocks,
and sobbings of the storm, what do they end in? and what is
the business of this tumult? The ebb and flow of these
questionings is eternal, as the flux and reflux of the sea itself.
Gilliatt could answer for himself; his work he knew, but the
agitation which surrounded him far and wide at all times perplexed
him confusedly with its eternal questionings. Unknown
to himself, mechanically, by the mere pressure of external things,
and without any other effect than a strange, unconscious bewilderment,
Gilliatt, in this dreamy mood, blended his own toil
somehow with the prodigious wasted labour of the sea-waves.
How, indeed, in that position, could he escape the influence of
that mystery of the dread, laborious ocean? how do other than
meditate, so far as meditation was possible, upon the vacillation
of the waves, the perseverance of the foam, the imperceptible
wearing down of rocks, the furious beatings of the four winds?
How terrible that perpetual recommencement, that ocean bed,
those Danaïdes-like clouds, all that travail and weariness for
no end!</p>

<p>For no end? Not so! But for what? O Thou Infinite
Unknown, Thou only knowest!</p>



<hr style="width: 65%;" />
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
