<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III: The Old Sea Language</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1-2" id="chapter-1-2-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h4>
				<h5 epub:type="title">The Old Sea Language</h5>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The mariners of the Channel are the true ancient Gauls. The islands, which in these days become rapidly more and more English⁠—preserved for many ages their old French character. The peasant in Sark speaks the language of Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>. Forty years ago, the old classical nautical language was to be found in the mouths of the sailors of Jersey and Aurigny. When amongst them, it was possible to imagine oneself carried back to the sea life of the seventeenth century. From that speaking trumpet which terrified Admiral Hidde, a philologist might have learnt the ancient technicalities of manoeuvring and giving orders at sea, in the very words which were roared out to his sailors by Jean Bart. The old French maritime vocabulary is now almost entirely changed, but was still in use in Jersey in <time datetime="1820">1820</time>. A ship that was a good plyer was <i xml:lang="fr">bon boulinier</i>; one that carried a weather-helm in spite of her foresails and rudder was <i xml:lang="fr">un vaisseau ardent</i>; to get under way was <i xml:lang="fr">prendre aire</i>; to lie to in a storm, <i xml:lang="fr">capeyer</i>; to make fast running rigging was <i xml:lang="fr">faire dormant</i>; to get to windward, <i xml:lang="fr">faire chapelle</i>; to keep the cable tight, <i xml:lang="fr">faire teste</i>; to be out of trim, <i xml:lang="fr">être en pantenne</i>; to keep the sails full, <i xml:lang="fr">porter plain</i>. These expressions have fallen out of use. Today we say <i xml:lang="fr">louvoyer</i> for to beat to windward, they said <i xml:lang="fr">leauvoyer</i>; for <i xml:lang="fr">naviguer</i>, sail, they said <i xml:lang="fr">naviger</i>; for <i xml:lang="fr">virer vent devant</i>, to tack, <i xml:lang="fr">donner vent devant</i>; for <i xml:lang="fr">aller de l’avant</i>, to make headway, <i xml:lang="fr">tailler de l’avant</i>; for <i xml:lang="fr">tirez d’accord</i>, haul together, <i xml:lang="fr">halez d’accord</i>; for <i xml:lang="fr">dérapez</i>, to weigh anchor, <i xml:lang="fr">deplantez</i>; for <i xml:lang="fr">embraquez</i>, to haul tight, <i xml:lang="fr">abraquez</i>; for <i xml:lang="fr">taquets</i>, cleats, <i xml:lang="fr">bittons</i>; for <i xml:lang="fr">burins</i>, toggles, <i xml:lang="fr">tappes</i>; for <i xml:lang="fr">balancine</i>, fore-lift, main-lift, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <i xml:lang="fr">valancine</i>; for <i xml:lang="fr">tribord</i>, starboard, <i xml:lang="fr">stribord</i>; for <i xml:lang="fr">les hommes de quart à bâbord</i>, men of the larboard watch, <i xml:lang="fr">les basbourdis</i>. Tourville wrote to Hocquincourt: <i xml:lang="fr">nous avons singlét</i> (sailed), for <i xml:lang="fr">cinglé</i>. Instead of <i xml:lang="fr">la rafale</i>, squall, <i xml:lang="fr">le raffal</i>; instead of <i xml:lang="fr">bossoir</i>, cat-head, <i xml:lang="fr">boussoir</i>; instead of <i xml:lang="fr">drosse</i>, truss, <i xml:lang="fr">drousse</i>; instead of <i xml:lang="fr">loffer</i>, to luff, <i xml:lang="fr">faire une olofée</i>; instead of <i xml:lang="fr">elonger</i>, to lay alongside, <i xml:lang="fr">alonger</i>; instead of <i xml:lang="fr">forte brise</i>, stiff breeze, <i xml:lang="fr">survent</i>; instead of <i xml:lang="fr">jouail</i>, stock of an anchor, <i xml:lang="fr">jas</i>; instead of <i xml:lang="fr">soute</i>, storeroom, <i xml:lang="fr">fosse</i>.</p>
			<p>Such, at the beginning of this century, was the maritime dialect of the Channel Islands. Ango would have been startled had he heard the speech of a Jersey pilot. Whilst everywhere else the sails <i xml:lang="fr">faseyaient</i> (shivered), in these islands they <i xml:lang="nrf">barbeyaient</i>. A <i xml:lang="fr">saute de vent</i>, sudden shift of wind, was a <i xml:lang="nrf">folle-vente</i>. The old methods of mooring known as <i xml:lang="nrf">la valture</i> and <i xml:lang="nrf">la portugaise</i> were alone used, and such commands as <i xml:lang="nrf">jour-et-chaque!</i> and <i xml:lang="nrf">bosse et vilte!</i> might still be heard. While a sailor of Granville was already employing the word <i xml:lang="fr">clan</i> for sheave-hold, one of <abbr>St.</abbr> Aubin or of <abbr>St.</abbr> Sampson still stuck to his <i xml:lang="nrf">canal de pouliot</i>. What was called <i xml:lang="fr">bout d’alonge</i> (upper fultock) at <abbr>St.</abbr> Malo, was <i xml:lang="nrf">oreille d’âne</i> at <abbr>St.</abbr> Helier. Mess Lethierry, as did the Duke de Vibonne, called the sheer of the decks <i xml:lang="nrf">la tonture</i>, and the caulker’s chisel <i xml:lang="nrf">la patarasse</i>.</p>
			<p>It was with this uncouth sea dialect in his mouth that Duquesne beat De Ruyter, that Duguay Trouin defeated Wasnaer, and that Tourville, in <time datetime="1681">1681</time>, poured a broadside into the first galley which bombarded Algiers. It is now a dead language. The idiom of the sea is altogether different. Duperré would not be able to understand Suffren.</p>
			<p>The language of French naval signals is not less transformed; there is a long distance between the four pennants, red, white, yellow, and blue, of Labourdonnaye, and the eighteen flags of these days, which, hoisted two and two, three and three, or four and four, furnish, for distant communication, sixty-six thousand combinations, are never deficient, and, so to speak, foresee the unforeseen.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
