<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Introduction</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="introduction" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Introduction</h2>
			<p>Victor Hugo was thinking much of Aeschylus and his Prometheus at the time he conceived the figure of Gilliatt, heroic warrer with the elements. But it is to a creature of the Gothic mind like Byron’s Manfred, and not to any earlier, or classic, type of the eternal rebellion against fate or time or circumstance, that Hugo’s readers will be tempted to turn for the fellow to his Guernsey hero:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“My joy was in the wilderness⁠—to breathe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The difficult air of the iced mountain’s top,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the birds dare not build⁠—nor insects wing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flit o’er the herbless granite; or to plunge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the torrent, and to roll along</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the swift whirl of the new-breaking wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of river-stream, or ocean, in their flow.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The island of Guernsey was Gilliatt’s Alp and sea-solitude, where he, too, had his avalanches waiting to fall “like foam from the round ocean of old Hell.” And as Byron figured his own revolt against the bonds in Manfred, so Hugo, being in exile, put himself with lyrical and rhetorical impetuosity into the island marcou and child of destiny that he concocted with “a little sand and a little blood and a deal of fantasy” in the years <time datetime="1864">1864</time> and <time datetime="1865">1865</time>. There is a familiar glimpse of the Hugo household to be had in the first winter of its transference to the Channel Islands, years before <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Travailleurs</i> was written, which betrays the mood from which finally sprang this concrete fable of the man-at-odds. It was the end of <time datetime="1852-11">November 1852</time>, and a father and his younger son sat in a room of a house of Marine Terrace, Jersey⁠—a plain, unpicturesque house; square, hard in outline, and newly whitewashed⁠—Methodism, said Hugo, in stones and mortar. Outside its windows the rain fell and the wind blew: the house was like a thing benumbed by the angry noise. The two inmates sat plunged in thought, possibly thinking of the sad significance of these beginnings of winter and of exile which had arrived together. At length the son (François Hugo) asked the father what he meant to do during their exile, which he had already predicted would be long? The father said, “I shall look at the sea.” Then came a silence, broken by a question as to what the son would do? To which he replied that he would translate Shakespeare.</p>
			<p>Victor Hugo’s own study or eulogy of Shakespeare was written as a preamble to his son’s translation of the plays. It is not too much to connect the new and ample creative work that followed, including his great novel of Revolution, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Misérables</i>, and his poems in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">La Légende des Siècles</i> (first series) with the double artistic stimulus gained from this conditioned solitude and his closer acquaintance with the dramatic mind of that “giant of the great art of the ages,” as he termed our English poet in the book already quoted from.</p>
			<p>The Shakespeare book is dated from Hauteville House, <time datetime="1864">1864</time>. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Travailleurs</i> from the same quarters, <time datetime="1866-03">March 1866</time>. The Hugos had perforce suddenly left Jersey for Guernsey in <time datetime="1855">1855</time>, owing to the gibes and flouts of an unlucky revolutionary Jersey journal, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal" xml:lang="fr">L’Homme</i>, at the two governments: Victor Hugo being already a marked man for his pains. The Guernsey house he inhabited for so many years had a spacious study in its upper story, with a large window, free to the sun and to the sea. Here he wrote, tirelessly, tremendously, as his custom was: beginning betimes in the early morning, and writing on till the time for his déjeuner: standing at a tall desk to write in his sea-tower. You must turn to certain of his poems and to the pages of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Misérables</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Travailleurs</i> for the mental colours and phantasmagoria of those days and years.</p>
			<p>It would be easy to point out, resuming an immense amount of criticism of his romances and of this story in particular, the defects on the side of dramatic and true life-likeness to be found in Hugo’s prose-narrative. But it is more helpful in turning to a storybook to know what has been said unreservedly in its favour. Hugo’s greatest appreciator was superlative in his praise, and it need hardly be explained that it was Swinburne who brought his tribute to the romance of Gilliatt also, after positing the parallel claims of Hugo’s five chief romances. Of the five, they were not, he said, to be comparatively classified in order of merit. “But I may perhaps be permitted to say without fear of deserved rebuke that none is to me personally a treasure of greater price than <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Les Travailleurs de la Mer</i>. The splendid energy of the book makes the superhuman energy of the hero seem not only possible but natural, and his triumph over all physical impossibilities not only natural but inevitable.” Swinburne’s love for the Channel Islands, and his poems inspired by them, were mainly due as we know to Hugo’s life and his books lived and written there.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">
					<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:personal-name">E. R.</abbr>
				</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
